
===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
mfSuSiE enables multi-cell-type fine-mapping and multi-omic inte-
gration of chromatin accessibility QTLs in aging brain
Anjing Liu 1,2, Hao Sun 3, Philip L. De Jager 4,5,6, David Bennett 7, The Alzheimer’s Disease Functional
Genomics Consortium , Gao Wang1,2,6,*, and William R. P . Denault8,9,10,*
1Center for Statistical Genetics, The Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, New Y ork, NY ,
USA
2Department of Biostatistics, Columbia University, New Y ork, NY , USA
3Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New Y ork,
NY , USA
4Center for Translational & Computational Neuroimmunology, Columbia University, New Y ork, NY , USA
5Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer’s Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University, New Y ork,
NY , USA
6Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New Y ork, NY , USA
7Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center and Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, USA
8Oslo Centre for Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
9Data Science Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
10Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
*Correspondence: William R.P . Denault williade@uio.no; Gao Wang, wang.gao@columbia.edu
Abstract. Molecular quantitative trait locus (QTL) studies increasingly profile chromatin accessibility,
histone modifications, DNA methylation, RNA modifications such as N6-methyladenosine (m6A), and
transcription across multiple cell types using high-throughput sequencing, generating dense base-pair-
resolved measurements. The conventional approach of testing each variant against each molecular fea-
ture independently suffers from severe multiple testing burden and ignores linkage disequilibrium and
spatial correlation. Existing fine-mapping methods only partially address these challenges and are sub-
optimal for analyzing such datasets: multivariate approaches such as mvSuSiE jointly analyze multiple
molecular contexts but are designed for a single trait value per context and cannot accommodate thou-
sands of base-resolution measurements per context, while functional approaches such as fSuSiE model
spatial structure across thousands of measurements but analyze each context separately. Here, we intro-
duce mfSuSiE, which integrates multivariate analysis with wavelet-based functional regression to jointly
fine-map thousands of base-resolution traits across multiple cell types. In simulations, mfSuSiE identi-
fied causal variants and affected molecular features more accurately thanfSuSiE, while mvSuSiE cannot
be applied to this type of data. Applied to single-nucleus chromatin accessibility data from six brain cell
types from postmortem aging human brains, mfSuSiE substantially increased discovery and resolution,
with substantial power gains for cell types with limited samples. Multi-cell-type analysis revealed extensive
sharing of regulatory effects on chromatin accessibility (caQTL). Importantly,mfSuSiE produces Bayesian
inference compatible with the SuSiE framework, enabling systematic multi-omic integration. Applied to
Alzheimer’s disease loci, we integrated caQTL with expression QTLs, epigenomic QTLs, and GWAS, ob-
serving regulatory patterns suggesting complex mechanisms at loci including EARS2, CHRNE, SCIMP,
and RABEP1.

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
2 Liu A. et al.
INTRODUCTION
The analysis of molecular quantitative trait loci (QTLs) has advanced rapidly over the past decade.
Early studies typically examined associations between individual genetic variants and single molecular
traits measured in one tissue or cell type. However, large-scale multi-tissue projects have shown that
many genetic effects are shared across related tissues and molecular modalities [1, 2]. These findings
have spurred the development of statistical methods that jointly analyze multiple correlated traits.
Existing fine-mapping approaches, such as SuSiE [3] and CAVIAR [4] for univariate traits, ormvSuSiE
[2] and CAFEH [5] for multivariate traits, have improved the resolution at which causal variants can
be identified. Yet these models treat traits as vectors of independent measurements — for example,
expression levels across tissues — without explicitly modeling the rich spatial structure captured by
modern sequencing-based molecular assays.
High-throughput assays such as ATAC-seq, RNA-seq, and ChIP-seq provide dense, base-pair–resolved
profiles along the genome, revealing local regulatory architectures and spatial patterns in chromatin
accessibility, transcription, and protein binding. We previously introduced functional SuSiE (fSuSiE)
[6, 7] to show that these high-resolution molecular readouts are more naturally represented as functions
over genomic coordinates than as isolated, position-wise summary statistics. Functional representa-
tions better capture the biological reality that causal genetic variants often induce spatially structured
changes, such as methylation QTLs affecting clusters of CpG sites, or splicing QTLs altering read-
depth profiles across introns.
Despite this progress, a critical gap remains in understanding how genetic variants shape molecular
phenotypes across multiple tissues or cell types simultaneously. Growing multi-omic datasets now
provide matched sequencing-based molecular profiles for several cell types within the same individuals,
creating an opportunity to dissect shared versus context-specific regulatory mechanisms. The ability
to jointly analyze chromatin accessibility across multiple cell types and integrate these results with
corresponding gene expression profiles would enable more precise characterization of transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms underlying complex traits. Because many genetic effects on complex traits
are mediated by cell-type-specific regulatory variation, and because regulatory effects often manifest
across multiple molecular layers (chromatin accessibility, gene expression, histone modifications), the
absence of methods that can jointly model multivariate and spatially structured molecular traits while
facilitating integration across modalities has become a major barrier to interpreting disease-associated
loci.
Here, we introduce multivariate functional SuSiE (mfSuSiE), a fine-mapping framework that ex-
tends fSuSiE to jointly model multiple functional molecular phenotypes across tissues, cell types, or
modalities. mfSuSiE represents the effect of each candidate causal variant as a multivariate function
along the genome, enabling the discovery of effects that are shared, partially shared, or cell-type-
specific. Building on principles from functional data analysis [6, 8–21], mfSuSiE retains the com-
putational scalability of SuSiE [3, 22] by decomposing multivariate fine-mapping into a sequence of
tractable single-effect updates. This design allows mfSuSiE to scale to tens of thousands of genomic
positions, dozens of tissues, and thousands of candidate variants. A key advantage of embedding our
approach within the SuSiE framework is seamless compatibility with the growing ecosystem of SuSiE-
based analytical tools, enabling sophisticated multi-omic integration pipelines through colocalization
analysis and other downstream methods.
We evaluate mfSuSiE using simulated multi-context functional QTL data and show that joint
modeling substantially improves fine-mapping accuracy compared to applying fSuSiE or univariate
methods independently to each context. We then apply mfSuSiE to chromatin accessibility profiles
from six major human brain cell types (astrocytes, excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, microglia,
oligodendrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells) generated by single-nucleus ATAC-seq from the
Religious Orders Study (ROS) and Memory and Aging Project (MAP), a longitudinal cohort study
of aging and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [23]. Through follow-up colocalization analysis, we integrate
chromatin accessibility (caQTL) results with expression QTLs (eQTLs) on single-nucleus RNA-seq
from the same cell types, as well as bulk brain eQTL and epigenomic QTLs (histone modification and
DNA methylation), and AD GWAS fine-mapping. We demonstrate how this multi-omic integration
refines variant- and gene-prioritization and elucidates regulatory mechanisms at AD risk loci.

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 3
RESULTS
Overview of Method
mfSuSiE extends fSuSiE [24] to jointly fine-map multiple molecular modalities. It takes as input
a collection of matrices ( Ym)m=1,...,M, where each Ym is an N × Tm matrix containing a molecular
phenotype for N samples measured at Tm genomic locations. Let X denote the N ×P genotype matrix
genotypes for the same samples at P candidate genetic variants. mfSuSiE models each modality by a
multivariate functional linear model,
Y1 = X F1 + E1, (1)
Y2 = X F2 + E2, (2)
...
YM = X FM + EM , (3)
where Fm is a P × Tm matrix of spatially varying effects for modality m, and Em is a matrix of
residuals. The element Fm,jt represents the effect of SNP j on genomic position t in modality m.
As in most fine-mapping methods [3, 25], mfSuSiE assumes that only a small number of SNPs have
non-zero effects, so most rows of Fm are zero. To impose this sparsity, mfSuSiE uses a multivariate
“sum of single effects” ( SuSiE) decomposition [3, 7, 22]:
Fm =
LX
l=1
F(l)
m , (4)
where each component F(l)
m corresponds to the effect of a single causal variant and therefore contains
exactly one non-zero row. Crucially, the non-zero row is shared across all modalities for a given l,
ensuring that each component identifies a shared causal SNP while allowing its functional effect to
differ across modalities.
To model spatial structure efficiently, mfSuSiE adopts the discrete wavelet representation used in
fSuSiE [12, 17, 26, 27]. Wavelets provide a compact multiscale representation of molecular phenotypes,
capturing both sharp local changes and broad genomic domains. In practice, mfSuSiE first applies
a wavelet transform to each modality in (1), then applies sparse priors to the transformed effect
coefficients to impose shrinkage.
A key practical advantage ofmfSuSiE is that it naturally handles missing data. Individuals may lack
measurements for certain modalities—for example, a donor may have ATAC-seq profiled in astrocytes
and oligodendrocytes but not in excitatory neurons. mfSuSiE performs inference using all available
observations without requiring imputation or restricting to complete cases.
Further, mfSuSiE accommodates mixtures of univariate and functional phenotypes, such as scalar
expression values for one modality and spatially resolved ATAC-seq profiles for another. For clarity,
we present the case where all modalities share the same genomic grid ( T1 = · · · = TM = T ), although
the framework can in principle support modalities defined over distinct genomic regions.

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
4 Liu A. et al.
Multi-omics QTL and GWAS Integration mfSuSiE Model
...
gPeak
permutation-adjusted p < 0.005
SNP
500 bp
phenotypechromatin accessibility
cell type C1
cell type C6
.
.
.
500 bp
±1MB
SNP
±1MB
.
.
. .
.
.
caQTL association
caQTL association
candidate peak
500 bpshared by ≥ 2 cell types
top SNP
Bulk RNAseq eQTL 
Bulk RNAseq pQTL 
snuc eQTL 
Bulk RNAseq sQTL
Colocalization with AD
Fine mapping
top SNPtop SNP
caQTL
AD
Loci
AD locus candidateposition
51.2 kb
Expanded Region for mfSuSiE
Bedgraph
call coverage
T1024
.
.
.
50 bp
 binning
Molecular profiles for joint fine-mapping
s1
Sn
Ast
Exc
Inh
Mic
Oli
OPC
Data
 ATAC-seq
Cell type specific chromatin profiles 
n = 92
.
.
.
 P1
 Pp
 T1  Tt  M1
 Mm
.
.
.
...
 P1 ...
 S1
 S2
 Sn
.
.
.
 Pp
F: Effect estimatesX: Genotype
Y=XF+ε
 T1  T2
A
B
CD
GWAS 
Locus
 caQTL 
locus
eQTL locus
colocalization
.
.
.
 S1
 Sn
 T1  Tt  M1
 Mm
.
.
.
...
Y: Phenotype
Candidate Region Selection and Molecular Phenotype Processing
gPeak
permutation-adjusted p < 0.005
Fig. 1. Overview of mfSuSiE and multi-cell-type chromatin accessibility QTL fine-mapping. Each panel
illustrates a component of the fine-mapping framework for multi-cell-type single-nucleus ATAC-seq data: (A)
Data processing from ROSMAP snATAC-seq (n=92 samples) generating cell-type-specific chromatin accessi-
bility profiles across six brain cell types (Ast: Astrocytes, Exc: Excitatory neurons, Inh: Inhibitory neurons, Mic:
Microglia, Oli: Oligodendrocytes, OPC: Oligodendrocyte precursor cells). (B) Candidate region selection: 156
established AD GWAS risk loci identified through FunGen-xQTL multi-context colocalization, plus 12 regions
where marginal caQTL associations (gPeaks, permutation-adjusted p < 0.005) were shared across at least
two cell types. Each region is expanded to 51.2kb windows. Phenotype processing: base-level ATAC-seq
coverage is binned into 1,024 bins × 50bp (51.2kb per region), creating high-resolution chromatin accessibility
matrices for mfSuSiE fine-mapping. (C) mfSuSiE joint modeling across six cell types, enabling simultaneous
fine-mapping to identify shared and cell-type-specific causal variants. (D) Multi-omic integration enabled by
mfSuSiE, including colocalization with expression QTLs, epigenomic QTLs, and AD GWAS to characterize reg-
ulatory mechanisms at disease loci.
Numerical study
We evaluated the performance of mfSuSiE through a series of simulation studies designed to reflect
effect of SNPs on one or more molecular trait (Figure 2. Genotypes were simulated using sim1000G
[28] with 1000 Genomes Phase 3 whole-genome sequencing data as input, yielding genomic regions of
approximately 1 Mb containing 1,500–4,000 SNPs. These regions exhibited realistic patterns of linkage
disequilibrium (LD), including cases of strong or perfect correlation between SNPs, making exact causal
SNP identification inherently challenging. Functional molecular phenotypes were simulated following
the wavelet-based generative model introduced in our previous work ( fSuSiE “wavelet simulations”),

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 5
A
B
Detection of causal SNPs (PIPs)
Detection of causal SNPs (CSs)
C Posthoc SuSiEX calibration
D Minimum LFSR calibration
Fig. 2. mfSuSiE simulation study: power, coverage, and computational efficiency. Simulation evaluation
of method performance across three modeling scenarios: single-molecular phenotype model, two-molecular
phenotype model, and multi-phenotype model. All simulations used sample size N = 100, with each simulation
randomly selecting 1–20 causal variants. The single-molecular phenotype model contains single molecular
phenotype (32 columns). The two-molecular phenotype model includes 2 molecular phenotypes (32 + 64
columns), showing improved power through joint modeling. The multi-phenotype model includes 2 molecular
phenotypes + 3 univariate phenotypes, demonstrating benefits of integrating diverse data modalities. (A) De-
tection of causal SNPs (PIPs). FDR and power curves for the three modeling scenarios under high noise
(SD=3). Blue and red curves represent mfSuSiE and fSuSiE methods, respectively. (B) Detection of causal
SNPs (CSs). Evaluation under high noise (SD=3). Left panel shows credible set coverage, assessing whether
credible sets contain true causal variants at nominal coverage. Middle panel shows credible set power across
model complexities. Right panel displays the number of credible sets by size for the two-molecular phenotype
model. (C) Running times. Computational efficiency comparison across methods for the three modeling sce-
narios, showing runtime across varying noise levels (SD=1 to SD=4).

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
6 Liu A. et al.
SD=1 SD=2 SD=3 SD=4
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
ROC: mfSuSiE vs SuSiE
SD=1 SD=2 SD=3 SD=4
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Mean PIP in Bin
Empirical Inclusion Probability
PIP Calibration
SD=1 SD=2 SD=3 SD=4
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
FDR
Power
Power vs FDR
Method mfSuSiE SuSiE
Fig. 3. mfSuSiE vs. SuSiE simulation: single univariate trait only. Simulation comparison of mfSuSiE and
univariate SuSiE when both methods receive identical input — a single univariate phenotype with no functional
traits (Yf = NULL, Yu ∈ RN ×1). Sample size N = 100, P ≈ 985 SNPs, L = 2 causal variants, noise levels
SD = 1, 2, 3, 4 (400 replicates each). (A) ROC curves. Receiver operating characteristic curves based
on posterior inclusion probabilities (PIPs), faceted by noise level. (B) PIP calibration. Empirical inclusion
probability versus mean PIP within each bin (11 bins, minimum 20 observations per bin). Error bars show 95%
confidence intervals. (C) Power vs. FDR. Power plotted against false discovery rate, obtained by sweeping a
PIP threshold from 0 to 1, faceted by noise level.

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 7
A
PIP calibration for correlated vs i.i.d data
B
Detection of causal SNPs (PIPs) for correlated vs i.i.d data
Fig. 4. mfSuSiE simulation study: power, coverage, and computational efficiency under correlated
residuals. Simulation evaluation of method performance across three modeling scenarios: single-molecular
phenotype model, two-molecular phenotype model, and multi-phenotype model. All simulations used sam-
ple size N = 100, with each simulation randomly selecting 1–20 causal variants. The single-molecular phe-
notype model contains single molecular phenotype (32 columns). The two-molecular phenotype model in-
cludes 2 molecular phenotypes (32 + 64 columns), showing improved power through joint modeling. The
multi-phenotype model includes 2 molecular phenotypes + 3 univariate phenotypes, demonstrating benefits
of integrating diverse data modalities. In the correlated residual setting, the noise across functional positions
follows a structured covariance matrix rather than being independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.). (A)
Detection of causal SNPs (PIPs). FDR and power curves for the three modeling scenarios under high noise
(SD=3) with correlated residuals. Blue and red curves represent mfSuSiE and fSuSiE methods, respectively.
(B) PIP calibration. Calibration of posterior inclusion probabilities across noise levels ( SD = 1 to 4) for the
fsusie and mfSuSiE method.

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
8 Liu A. et al.
Fig. 5. mfSuSiE simulation study: power, coverage, and computational efficiency under correlated
residuals. Simulation evaluation of method performance across three modeling scenarios: single-molecular
phenotype model, two-molecular phenotype model, and multi-phenotype model. All simulations used sam-
ple size N = 100, with each simulation randomly selecting 1–20 causal variants. The single-molecular phe-
notype model contains single molecular phenotype (32 columns). The two-molecular phenotype model in-
cludes 2 molecular phenotypes (32 + 64 columns), showing improved power through joint modeling. The
multi-phenotype model includes 2 molecular phenotypes + 3 univariate phenotypes, demonstrating benefits
of integrating diverse data modalities. In the correlated residual setting, the noise across functional positions
follows a structured covariance matrix rather than being independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.). (A)
Detection of causal SNPs (PIPs). FDR and power curves for the three modeling scenarios under high noise
(SD=3) with correlated residuals. Blue and red curves represent mfSuSiE and fSuSiE methods, respectively.
(B) Detection of causal SNPs (CSs). Evaluation under high noise (SD=3). Left panel shows credible set cov-
erage, assessing whether credible sets contain true causal variants at nominal coverage. Right panel shows
credible set power across model complexities. (C) PIP calibration. Calibration of posterior inclusion probabili-
ties across noise levels (SD = 1 to 4) for the fsusie and mfSuSiE method.

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 9
while univariate phenotypes were generated according to the model of [3]. Across simulation replicates,
we varied the number of SNPs, the number of causal variants, and the noise level. Detailed descriptions
of the simulation settings are provided in the Online Methods.
To compare mfSuSiE and fSuSiE, we considered three modeling scenarios under a fixed sample
size of N = 100: a single functional phenotype analyzed by both methods; two molecular phenotypes
analyzed jointly by mfSuSiE versus fine mapping separately both molecular by fSuSiE and reports
CS for both; and a full model in which mfSuSiE jointly analyzes two functional and three univariate
phenotypes, while fSuSiE analyzes only the first functional phenotype. This design allowed us to
assess the benefits of multivariate joint modeling relative to single-trait functional fine-mapping.
Across all scenarios, we examined the methods’ ability to identify causal SNPs affecting at least
one molecular trait at one or more genomic locations. Both methods produce posterior inclusion
probabilities (PIPs) and 95% credible sets (CSs), which serve as the primary outputs in fine-mapping
analyses. Because LD often makes it impossible to pinpoint a single causal SNP, Credible sets provide
a more appropriate metric of performance: a method is considered effective if it returns small, high-
purity CSs with reliable coverage (i.e., the proportion of true SNP in a given CS, target coverage =
95%). While PIPs remain informative for ranking candidate variants, CS size, coverage, and purity
are the most relevant measures of fine-mapping accuracy.
Unsurprisingly, mfSuSiE and fSuSiE performed similarly when applied to a single functional phe-
notype. However, the benefits of mfSuSiE became apparent once multiple phenotypes were intro-
duced. In the two-phenotype and full-model settings, fSuSiE (single-phenotype analysis) exhibited
reduced sensitivity, and diminished power. In contrast, mfSuSiE effectively leveraged information
across modalities, producing smaller and more precise credible sets while maintaining high coverage
and distinguishing true causal variants more reliably. These results highlight the advantages of joint
functional fine-mapping when causal variants exert shared or partially shared effects across molecular
traits.
Application to chromatin accessibility QTLs in aging brain
To demonstrate the utility of multi-cell-type functional fine-mapping, we applied mfSuSiE to single-
nucleus ATAC-seq data from the ROSMAP study [23]. Chromatin accessibility profiles were obtained
from six major brain cell types previously profiled in 92 donors from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
[29], including astrocytes (Ast), excitatory neurons (Exc), inhibitory neurons (Inh), microglia (Mic),
oligodendrocytes (Oli), and oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC).
We selected 156 established Alzheimer’s disease GWAS risk loci identified through multi-context
xQTL colocalization by the FunGen-xQTL project, with the goal of characterizing cell-type-specific
chromatin accessibility regulation at disease loci of interest. We additionally included 12 regions
where conventional marginal association testing detected shared signals across at least two cell types,
to assess whether mfSuSiE could recover effects detectable by standard approaches. We detail the
selection of these regions in online Methods section Molecular QTL data resource and processing. For
each region, we constructed high-resolution chromatin accessibility phenotypes by binning base-level
coverage into 1,024 genomic positions spanning 51.2 kb windows (50 bp bins), and extracted genotype
data for SNPs within ±500 kb (typically 2,000–4,000 SNPs per region) from whole-genome sequences
on these donors [30]. Data processing and quality control procedures are detailed in the Methods.
Multi-cell-type fine-mapping with mfSuSiE identified 609 candidate regulatory variants from a to-
tal of 332 CS (target coverage (5%) across candidate regions after quality control filtering, following
standard fine-mapping practices established in the FunGen-xQTL project (variants within CS having
purity > 0.8, or outside of CS with posterior inclusion probability > 0.1). Compared to single-cell-
type analysis with fSuSiE, joint modeling with mfSuSiE across cell types produced more credible sets
overall and notably more compact credible sets, achieving higher resolution in prioritizing candidate
causal variants (Fig. 8A). To characterize which genomic positions and cell types are affected by each
credible set, we computed local false sign rates (LFSR) for the functional regression coefficients at
each genomic position and cell type; positions with LFSR < 0.01 were considered to show significant
effects. Among credible sets meeting quality thresholds, mfSuSiE identified substantially more with
significant effects across cell types compared to fSuSiE (Fig. 8B). The improvement was particularly

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
10 Liu A. et al.
Fig. 6. Overview of mfSuSiE benchmark of lBF. All panels summarize results from mfSuSiE or single-
cell-type fSuSiE under consistent filtering criteria. Credible sets (CSs) are retained when purity exceeds 0.8,
where purity is the minimum absolute correlation among variants within a CS. Posterior inclusion probability
(PIP) reflects the posterior probability that each variant is causal; variants with PIP > 0.1 outside 95% CSs are
included as additional candidates. Local false sign rate (LFSR) is the posterior probability of incorrect effect
direction; LFSR < 0.01 indicates significant effects. Bin-overlap is defined as sharing a significant effect (LFSR
< 0.01) in the same 50 bp genomic bin within a ±200 bp window across cell types. (A) Distributions of CS
sizes for mfSuSiE (blue) and single-cell-type fSuSiE (gray) after purity filtering. (B) Number of CSs per cell
type containing at least one SNP with LFSR < 0.01. (C) Overlap of fSuSiE CSs with mfSuSiE CSs, stratified
into overlapping and non-overlapping sets. (D–F) Sharing patterns of CSs across six brain cell types under
three criteria. (D) Basic sharing criterion: CSs with purity > 0.8 and lowest LFSR < 0.01 in each cell type; bars
show the number of CSs that are significant in exactly k cell types. (E) Same-effect-sign criterion: restricted
to CSs passing the basic criterion, further requiring that more than 50% of effects across cell types have the
same sign. (F) Bin-overlap criterion: CSs with at least one bin (LFSR < 0.01) shared across multiple cell types.
(G–I) Asymmetric pairwise CS sharing between cell types under the same three criteria. Entries show, for
each row cell type, the fraction of its CSs that are shared with the column cell type; sharing is defined by the
corresponding basic, same-effect-sign, or bin-overlap rule, and computed as the size of the intersection divided
by the number of CSs in the row cell type. (J–K) UpSet-style summaries of multi-cell-type CS sharing. (J)
Combined view under basic and same-effect-sign criteria. (K) Sharing under the bin-overlap criterion. Bars
display the number of CSs shared by each combination of cell types. (L) Chromosome distribution of putative
causal variants (PIP > 0.5) within CSs meeting the purity threshold.

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 11
B
 CA
ED F
I
HG
LKJ
Fig. 7. Overview of mfSuSiE fine-mapping results and comparison with single-cell-type analysis. All
panels summarize results from mfSuSiE or single-cell-type fSuSiE under consistent filtering criteria. Credible
sets (CSs) are retained when purity exceeds 0.8, where purity is the minimum absolute correlation among
variants within a CS. Posterior inclusion probability (PIP) reflects the posterior probability that each variant is
causal; variants with PIP > 0.1 outside 95% CSs are included as additional candidates. Local false sign rate
(LFSR) is the posterior probability of incorrect effect direction; LFSR < 0.01 indicates significant effects. Bin-
overlap is defined as sharing a significant effect (LFSR< 0.01) in the same 50 bp genomic bin within a±200 bp
window across cell types. (A) Distributions of CS sizes for mfSuSiE (blue) and single-cell-type fSuSiE (gray)
after purity filtering. (B) Number of CSs per cell type containing at least one SNP with LFSR < 0.01. (C)
Overlap of fSuSiE CSs with mfSuSiE CSs, stratified into overlapping and non-overlapping sets. (D–F) Sharing
patterns of CSs across six brain cell types under three criteria. (D) Basic sharing criterion: CSs with purity
> 0.8 and lowest LFSR < 0.01 in each cell type; bars show the number of CSs that are significant in exactly
k cell types. (E) Same-effect-sign criterion: restricted to CSs passing the basic criterion, further requiring that
more than 50% of effects across cell types have the same sign. (F) Bin-overlap criterion: CSs with at least
one bin (LFSR < 0.01) shared across multiple cell types. (G–I) Asymmetric pairwise CS sharing between cell
types under the same three criteria. Entries show, for each row cell type, the fraction of its CSs that are shared
with the column cell type; sharing is defined by the corresponding basic, same-effect-sign, or bin-overlap rule,
and computed as the size of the intersection divided by the number of CSs in the row cell type. (J–K) UpSet-
style summaries of multi-cell-type CS sharing. (J) Combined view under basic and same-effect-sign criteria.
(K) Sharing under the bin-overlap criterion. Bars display the number of CSs shared by each combination of
cell types. (L) Chromosome distribution of putative causal variants (PIP > 0.5) within CSs meeting the purity
threshold.

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
12 Liu A. et al.
Fig. 8. Overview of mfSuSiE fine-mapping results. All panels summarize results from mfSuSiE under
consistent filtering criteria. Credible sets (CSs) are retained when purity exceeds 0.8, where purity is the
minimum absolute correlation among variants within a CS. Posterior inclusion probability (PIP) reflects the
posterior probability that each variant is causal; variants with PIP > 0.1 outside 95% CSs are included as
additional candidates. Local false sign rate (LFSR) is the posterior probability of incorrect effect direction;
LFSR < 0.01 indicates significant effects. Bin-overlap is defined as sharing a significant effect (LFSR < 0.01)
in the same 50 bp genomic bin within a ±200 bp window across cell types. (A) Distribution of CS sizes after
purity filtering. (B) Number of CSs per cell type with posthoc > 0.8. (C) Chromosome distribution of putative
causal variants (PIP > 0.5) within CSs meeting the purity threshold. (D–G) Sharing patterns of CSs across
six brain cell types under four criteria; bars show the number of CSs that are significant in exactly k cell types.
(D) Post-hoc criterion: CSs with post-hoc probability ≥ 0.8. (E) Basic sharing criterion: CSs with purity > 0.8
and lowest LFSR < 0.01 in each cell type. (F) Same-effect-sign criterion: restricted to CSs passing the basic
criterion, further requiring that more than 50% of effects across cell types have the same sign. (G) Bin-overlap
criterion: CSs with at least one bin (LFSR< 0.01) shared across multiple cell types.(H–K) Asymmetric pairwise
CS sharing between cell types under the same four criteria. Entries show, for each row cell type, the fraction of
its CSs that are shared with the column cell type; sharing is computed as the size of the intersection divided by
the number of CSs in the row cell type. (H) Post-hoc criterion. (I) Basic sharing criterion. (J) Same-effect-sign
criterion. (K) Bin-overlap criterion. (L–O) UpSet-style summaries of multi-cell-type CS sharing under the same
four criteria; bars display the number of CSs shared by each combination of cell types. (L) Post-hoc criterion.
(M) Basic sharing criterion. (N) Same-effect-sign criterion. (O) Bin-overlap criterion.

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 13
significant for oligodendrocyte precursor cells: single-cell-type fSuSiE identified essentially no credible
sets with significant OPC effects, whereas mfSuSiE identified over 200 such credible sets by lever-
aging shared regulatory architecture with other brain cell types. Beyond providing smaller credible
sets and increased discovery, mfSuSiE maintains strong consistency with single-cell-type fSuSiE re-
sults (Fig. 8C): the majority of fSuSiE credible sets (90.2%) showed direct correspondence with an
mfSuSiE credible set, demonstrating that mfSuSiE robustly replicates signals identified by single-cell-
type analysis.
Analysis of these credible sets with significant effects revealed extensive sharing of regulatory ar-
chitecture. The distribution of significant cell-type effects peaked at 5–6 cell types per credible set
(Fig. 8D), indicating that most regulatory variants affect chromatin accessibility across multiple brain
cell lineages rather than acting in a single cell type. Applying additional constraints on effect direction
and spatial concordance progressively reduced the extent of sharing but preserved the overall pattern
(Fig. 8E–F). Directional consistency across cell types moderately attenuated sharing, while requiring
spatial overlap of functional effects yielded a more conservative subset of shared signals, reflecting
tighter regulatory coordination. Pairwise comparisons of credible set sharing confirmed high concor-
dance among major neuronal (Exc, Inh) and glial (Ast, Mic) populations, while OPC exhibited more
distinctive patterns with other cell types; Fig. 8G-I), consistent with its specialized developmental role.
UpSet representations provided a complementary summary of these results. The UpSet plot based on
significance and directional consistency (Fig. 8J) confirmed that the most frequent sharing configura-
tions involved simultaneous effects across multiple neuronal (Exc, Inh) and glial (Ast, Mic) cell types,
consistent with a broadly shared regulatory architecture. In contrast, the spatial overlap–based UpSet
plot (Fig. 8K) exhibited markedly sparser configurations, dominated by lower-order overlaps, indicat-
ing that precise spatial alignment of regulatory effects is restricted to a smaller subset of cell-type
combinations. Genome-wide distribution of putative causal variants (PIP > 0.5 within credible sets)
showed that chromosome 19 had the highest concentration (18.5%, n=58 variants), mapping predom-
inantly to the APOE/TOMM40/APOC cluster, and chromosome 16 also showed notable enrichment
(9.5%, n=29 variants), largely within the DOC2A/YPEL3/INO80E cluster (Fig. 8L). These two re-
gions are among the most gene-dense among AD risk loci, so the concentration of regulatory variants
in these regions is consistent with their dense regulatory architecture. However, both regions also
exhibit extensive linkage disequilibrium, which may complicate interpretation of independent causal
signals.
Multi-omic integration via colocalization analysis
CS size sentinel SNP
1
2
2
1
chr17:4883698:CTTTT>CTTT
chr17:4778415:G>T
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7
base−pair position on chromosome 17 (MB)
PIP
Fig. 9. Example mfSuSiE fine-mapping of chromatin accessibility. Posterior inclusion probabilities (PIPs)
for all SNPs analyzed in the region chr17:4,713,084–5,713,084.
One added advantage of fine-mapping chromatin accessibility QTLs with mfSuSiE is the ability to
integrate these results with other molecular QTL data to strengthen discoveries and provide mechanis-
tic insights, addressing the inherent challenge of limited sample sizes in some molecular QTL studies
(in this case, our single-nucleus ATAC-seq data). Recent advances in colocalization analysis enable
leveraging fine-mapping results directly as input [31]; extending this framework allows us to use mf-
SuSiE credible sets to test for shared genetic effects with expression QTLs and GWAS, combining

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
14 Liu A. et al.
evidence across complementary data types.
We performed colocalization analysis to integrate our mfSuSiE chromatin accessibility results with
additional FunGen-xQTL data. Expression QTLs were fine-mapped using mvSuSiE [32] on bulk
and single-nucleus RNA-seq from the same ROSMAP donors (n=416 bulk; cell-type sample sizes in
Methods), analyzing the six matched brain cell types plus additional bulk contexts. Each method,
mvSuSiE (multivariate fine-mapping with adaptive shrinkage mixture prior) and mfSuSiE (wavelet-
based functional fine-mapping across multi-traits), was designed for its specific molecular context
to characterize cell-type sharing patterns, boost statistical power, and improve detection accuracy.
Combining them enables 12-dimensional integration: six cell types with paired chromatin accessibility
and gene expression, each fine-mapped in its appropriate framework. We further integrated with
Alzheimer’s disease GWAS fine-mapping (usingSuSiE on summary statistics [33]) to focus our analysis
on established disease loci rather than genome-wide discovery. This multi-modal, multi-cell-type
integration framework has not been previously demonstrated and is made possible by SuSiE-based
fine-mapping compatibility. Applying this framework, we illustrated candidate regulatory landscape
at two loci, described below.
Alzheimer disease     95% CS size= 130
EARS2  eQTL in PCC     95% CS size= 59
EARS2  eQTL in AC     95% CS size= 39
EARS2  eQTL in Exc     95% CS size= 55
EARS2  eQTL in Inh     95% CS size= 34
0
2
4
6
0
5
10
15
20
0
10
20
30
0
5
10
15
20
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
−log10 p−value
ExcOli
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15mfSuSiE effect
mfSuSiE−AD, mfSuSiE−mvSuSiE
coloc locus
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08mvSuSiE PIP
EARS2
23000000 23250000 23500000 23750000 24000000
Genomic Position (chr16)
Fig. 10. Multi-omic integration at EARS2 AD risk locus. Top panels show single-trait SuSiE fine-mapping
for AD GWAS and EARS2 eQTLs across PCC, AC, Exc, and Inh. Blue points represent variants belonging to
each trait’s 95% credible set. The lower panels summarize mfSuSiE fine-mapping of chromatin accessibility
in excitatory neurons and oligodendrocytes. mfSuSiE identifies significant chromatin effects (LFSR < 0.01)
in four cell types—Ast, Exc, Mic, and Oli. Similarly, mvSuSiE fine-mapping of EARS2 expression detects
significant eQTL effects (LFSR < 0.01) in bulk cortical tissues (AC, PCC, DLPFC) as well as in Exc, Inh,
and Oli. Y ellow circles mark variants supported across pairwise colocalization analyses connecting mfSuSiE
(chromatin), mvSuSiE (expression), and AD GWAS, indicating that the shared variants fall within the same
high-LD locus.

===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 15
Multi-omic convergence at a suggestive AD risk region with EARS2. Colocalization analysis
between chromatin accessibility fine-mapping and AD GWAS (mfSuSiE–SuSiE) identified a suggestive
association at the EARS2 locus (chr16:23.4–23.5 Mb, peak GWAS p = 2.41×10−6), yielding a credible
set of 33 variants (PP.H4> 0.8). We also performed colocalization between chromatin accessibility and
expression QTLs ( mfSuSiE–mvSuSiE), identifying a credible set of 19 variants. The overlap between
these two colocalization analyses prioritized a one-base deletion at chr16:23580183, showing significant
effects on chromatin accessibility in oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, microglia, and excitatory neurons
(LFSR < 0.01) and on EARS2 expression in excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, oligodendrocytes
(cell-type-specific eQTLs, LFSR < 0.01), plus dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex,
and anterior cingulate cortex (bulk eQTLs, LFSR < 0.01).
Integration with expression QTL data revealed consistent regulatory effects across molecular layers.
The chromatin accessibility increases associated with the candidate variant corresponded to elevated
EARS2 expression in both bulk tissue and cell-type-specific contexts. Functional annotation of the 19
variants in mvSuSiE–mfSuSiE colocalization demonstrated enrichment for active regulatory features:
12 of examined variants fell within a super-enhancer region marked by H3K27ac, 9 showed H3K4me1
enhancer marks, and several exhibited evidence of transcription factor binding and RNA polymerase II
occupancy. Hi-C interaction data indicated long-range enhancer-promoter contacts, supporting direct
regulatory communication between the variant-containing region and theEARS2 promoter. Complete
functional annotations are provided in Supplementary Table 3.
EARS2 encodes glutamyl-tRNA synthetase 2, essential for mitochondrial protein synthesis. Dis-
ruption of EARS2 function leads to mitochondrial dysfunction, which has been implicated in neu-
rodegenerative processes. While EARS2 has not been definitively linked to AD pathogenesis, the
convergent evidence from chromatin accessibility, gene expression, and AD GWAS, combined with
its biological role in mitochondrial function known to regulate amyloid-beta and tau proteins in AD,
suggests this locus warrants further investigation as a potential contributor to AD risk through mito-
chondrial mechanisms.
Coordinated regulation across genomic distance at AD risk loci involving multiple genes.
Colocalization analysis at an established AD risk locus on chromosome 17 (chr17:4.8–5.3 Mb, peak
GWAS p = 6 .84 × 10−13) revealed complex regulatory architecture involving multiple genes. This
region contains a cluster including CHRNE (cholinergic receptor nicotinic epsilon subunit), SCIMP
(SLP adaptor and CSK interacting membrane protein), and RABEP1 (rabaptin, RAB GTPase bind-
ing effector protein 1). Colocalization between chromatin accessibility fine-mapping and AD GWAS
(mfSuSiE–SuSiE) identified variants at approximately 4.9 Mb (PP.H4 = 0.86).
Examining the fine-mapped chromatin accessibility effects more closely, we found that variants at
the 4.9 Mb position affect chromatin accessibility across all six brain cell types, with significant effects
(LFSR < 0.01) extending to the 5.2 Mb region (Fig. 11). These distal effects span approximately 330
kb and encompass the SCIMP gene region, including 3.8 kb upstream and 21.4 kb downstream of
the gene body, but do not extend to RABEP1 (located 43.6 kb away). Fine-mapping with mvSuSiE
identified expression QTL credible sets at the 5.2 Mb region for both SCIMP (microglia, astrocytes,
excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, and bulk tissues) and RABEP1 (microglia, oligodendrocytes,
and bulk tissues). The target regions of chromatin accessibility effects from the 4.9 Mb variants
overlap with these fine-mapped eQTL credible sets in their respective cell types, confirming functional
consequences of the distal chromatin changes (Fig. 11).
To further investigate the 4.9 Mb region, we performedmfSuSiE-mvSuSiE colocalization to examine
additional molecular QTL modalities. We observed bulk tissue eQTL effects at this position for
CHRNE (anterior cingulate cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and posterior cingulate cortex),
but notably, no cell-type-specific eQTL signal. Moreover, while the caQTL effects extended distally
to 5.2 Mb, the 4.9 Mb region itself showed no chromatin accessibility changes. To understand whether
other epigenetic mechanisms might be operating at this locus, we applied fSuSiE (which can be viewed
as a special case of mfSuSiE with a single phenotype) to histone modification and DNA methylation
QTL data from FunGen-xQTL (details in Methods). Fine-mapping of H3K9ac (histone acetylation)
and DNA methylation QTLs both identified credible sets at 4.9 Mb in high linkage disequilibrium

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
16 Liu A. et al.
Fig. 11. Multi-omic integration at the CHRNE/SCIMP/RABEP1 AD risk locus. Integration of mfSuSiE chro-
matin accessibility fine-mapping with expression QTLs, epigenomic QTLs, and AD GWAS at chromosome 17:
(A) Regional overview showing mfSuSiE–SuSiE colocalization analysis with AD GWAS at 4.9 Mb (PP .H4 =
0.86) and chromatin accessibility effects extending to the 5.2 Mb region across all six brain cell types. (B)
mvSuSiE expression QTL fine-mapping at 5.2 Mb showing eQTL signals for SCIMP (microglia, astrocytes,
excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, bulk tissues) and RABEP1 (microglia, oligodendrocytes, bulk tissues),
with target regions overlapping mfSuSiE chromatin accessibility effects. (C) fSuSiE fine-mapping of H3K9ac
and DNA methylation QTLs at 4.9 Mb, with credible sets in high LD (r2 = 0.95) with mfSuSiE-identified variants.
Effect directions are consistent with increased transcriptional activity: AD risk allele associates with increased
H3K9ac and decreased DNA methylation. (D) Bulk tissue eQTL showing elevated CHRNE expression associ-
ated with AD risk variants at 4.9 Mb, supporting a regulatory cascade where variants modulate local epigenetic
marks to control CHRNE expression while extending chromatin accessibility effects distally to regulate SCIMP
and RABEP1.

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 17
(r2 = 0 .95) with the mfSuSiE-identified caQTL. Effect directions were consistent with increased
transcriptional activity: the AD risk allele associated with increased H3K9ac (transcription-promoting)
and decreased DNA methylation (transcription-promoting) at regulatory elements near CHRNE, with
corresponding elevated CHRNE expression in bulk tissue (Fig. 11).
Our analysis reveals regulatory architecture at this locus that potentially involves multiple co-
ordinated mechanisms: AD risk variants at 4.9 Mb modulate local histone acetylation and DNA
methylation to enhance CHRNE expression while simultaneously increasing chromatin accessibility
across brain cell types, with effects extending distally to 5.2 Mb to control SCIMP and RABEP1
expression. CHRNE encodes a subunit of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors critical for cholinergic
signaling, with elevated expression linked to AD risk through inflammatory signaling and microglial
activation. Both SCIMP and RABEP1 have also been implicated in AD pathogenesis, with SCIMP
involved in microglial immune responses and RABEP1 in endosomal trafficking pathways relevant to
amyloid processing. Notably, the 4.9 Mb and 5.2 Mb regions show only moderate linkage disequilib-
rium (r2 ≈ 0.13), suggesting they may act independently within a coordinated cis-regulatory network,
with the top AD GWAS signal potentially reflecting aggregated LD effects across these regulatory
elements. This multi-omic integration, enabled by mfSuSiE-based colocalization, allows us to clearly
visualize and describe this complex regulatory architecture, which would be difficult to characterize
without both the multi-cell-type fine-mapping framework and the integrated analysis across molecular
modalities that mfSuSiE facilitates.
DISCUSSION
We have introducedmfSuSiE, a method that extends functional fine-mapping to jointly analyze molec-
ular QTLs across multiple cell types or contexts. Applied to single-nucleus chromatin accessibility data
from aging brain, mfSuSiE substantially increased discovery of candidate regulatory variants compared
to both conventional per-peak per-variant association testing and single-cell-type analysis withfSuSiE.
Multi-cell-type analysis produced more credible sets, achieved higher fine-mapping resolution, and en-
abled characterization of extensive cell-type sharing patterns in chromatin accessibility regulation. An
additional strength of mfSuSiE is its ability to accommodate phenotypes measured on partially over-
lapping or non-identical sample sets. Because the model can integrate molecular QTL data even when
different modalities or cell types are profiled in distinct subsets of individuals, it substantially broadens
the range of datasets that can be analyzed jointly. This flexibility makes mfSuSiE particularly well
suited for large consortia studies, where multi-omic measurements are rarely obtained from the same
donors. A key advantage of mfSuSiE beyond improved statistical power is that it enables systematic
integration with other molecular modalities through colocalization analysis. By producing Bayesian
inferences compatible with the broader SuSiE fine-mapping framework, mfSuSiE facilitates complex
multi-omic integration pipelines that would otherwise require separate, disconnected analyses. As
we demonstrated through 13-dimensional integration of chromatin accessibility, gene expression, and
GWAS data, this capability allows researchers to trace regulatory effects across molecular layers and
refine mechanistic understanding of disease-associated variants.
The framework we present is broadly applicable beyond chromatin accessibility QTLs. While we
focused on single-nucleus ATAC-seq to illustrate multi-cell-type fine-mapping, mfSuSiE can be ap-
plied to any molecular QTL data that suits the functional regression framework, i.e., measurements
are spatially structured along the genome and that the same genomic positions are measured across
contexts. This includes analyzing histone modifications or DNA methylation across tissues or devel-
opmental stages, or combinations of multiple epigenetic marks measured in parallel. It can also be
extended to analyzing any high-throughput sequencing data where coverage patterns represent the
molecular phenotype. For instance, mfSuSiE could be applied directly to base-level RNA-seq coverage
data instead of having to quantify gene-level expression first, which would enable joint fine-mapping
of chromatin accessibility and gene expression from emerging multiome technologies. Such direct joint
modeling would leverage the paired measurements more effectively than the post hoc colocalization
approach we employed here.
Our work has several limitations representing directions for future research. The ROSMAP single-
nucleus ATAC-seq data analyzed here, while demonstrating the advantages of multi-cell-type analy-

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
18 Liu A. et al.
sis, comprises a relatively small sample for systematic characterization of regulatory architecture in
Alzheimer’s disease. We took a candidate region approach, guided by marginal association signals and
established AD risk loci, rather than conducting genome-wide fine-mapping across all accessible re-
gions. Applying mfSuSiE to larger single-nucleus chromatin accessibility datasets would enable more
comprehensive discovery and better powered studies of cell-type-specific regulation in complex dis-
eases. Second, the current implementation requires analyzing one molecular modality (e.g., chromatin
accessibility) at a time within specified cis-regulatory windows around multiple molecular contexts
(e.g., cell types). Future work could develop efficient implementation for simultaneously fine-mapping
effects across multiple molecular layers within extended genomic windows, providing a more statisti-
cally principled and powerful framework for elucidating complex cis-regulatory networks.
Our work has several limitations that point to important directions for future research. Although
the ROSMAP single-nucleus ATAC-seq dataset illustrates the advantages of multi-cell-type fine-
mapping, it remains relatively small for a systematic analysis of regulatory architecture in Alzheimer’s
disease. Because of this, we adopted a candidate-region strategy guided by marginal association sig-
nals and known AD risk loci, rather than performing genome-wide fine-mapping across all accessible
regions. Applying mfSuSiE to larger single-nucleus chromatin accessibility cohorts will be essential for
more comprehensive discovery and for better-powered characterization of cell-type-specific regulatory
mechanisms in complex diseases. Additionally, although we analyzed six chromatin accessibility phe-
notypes jointly, our application focused on a single molecular modality. In principle, mfSuSiE could
support simultaneous joint fine-mapping across heterogeneous molecular layers — ATAC-seq, DNA
methylation, histone marks, RNA-seq coverage, and others — within extended genomic windows. We
were unable to perform such analyses here due to data access constraints, relying instead on colocal-
ization of Bayes factors across modalities. Future work will focus on performing joint fine-mapping of
heterogeneous modality at a genome-wide scale.
References
[1] Urbut, S. M., G. Wang, P. Carbonetto, and M. Stephens (2019, January). Flexible statistical
methods for estimating and testing effects in genomic studies with multiple conditions. Nature
Genetics 51 (1), 187–195.
[2] Zou, Y., P. Carbonetto, D. Xie, G. Wang, and M. Stephens (2023). Fast and flexi-
ble joint fine-mapping of multiple traits via the Sum of Single Effects model. bioRxiv,
doi:10.1101/2023.04.14.536893.
[3] Wang, G., A. Sarkar, P. Carbonetto, and M. Stephens (2020). A simple new approach to variable
selection in regression, with application to genetic fine mapping. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, Series B 82 (5), 1273–1300.
[4] Hormozdiari, F., E. Kostem, E. Y. Kang, B. Pasaniuc, and E. Eskin (2014, 8). Identifying causal
variants at loci with multiple signals of association. Genetics 198 (2), 497–508.
[5] Arvanitis, M., K. Tayeb, B. J. Strober, and A. Battle (2022). Redefining tissue specificity of genetic
regulation of gene expression in the presence of allelic heterogeneity. American Journal of Human
Genetics 109 (2), 223–239.
[6] Shim, H., Z. Xing, E. Pantaleo, F. Luca, R. Pique-Regi, and M. Stephens (2024). Multiscale Poisson
process approaches for detecting and estimating differences from high-throughput sequencing assays.
Annals of Applied Statistics 18 (3), 1773–1788.
[7] Denault, W. R., H. Sun, P. Carbonetto, A. Liu, P. L. De Jager, D. Bennett, G. Wang, M. Stephens,
A. D. F. G. Consortium, et al. (2025). fsusie enables fine-mapping of qtls from genome-scale molec-
ular profiles. bioRxiv.
[8] Jaffe, A. E., P. Murakami, H. Lee, J. T. Leek, M. D. Fallin, A. P. Feinberg, and R. A. Irizarry
(2012). Bump hunting to identify differentially methylated regions in epigenetic epidemiology stud-
ies. International Journal of Epidemiology 41 (1), 200–209.
[9] Pedersen, B. S., D. A. Schwartz, I. V. Yang, and K. J. Kechris (2012). Comb-p: software for
combining, analyzing, grouping and correcting spatially correlated P-values. Bioinformatics 28 (22),
2986–2988.

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 19
[10] Lent, S., H. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Sarnowski, M.-F. Hivert, and J. Dupuis (2018). Com-
parison of novel and existing methods for detecting differentially methylated regions. BMC Genet-
ics 19 (Suppl 1), 84.
[11] Peters, T. J., M. J. Buckley, A. L. Statham, R. Pidsley, K. Samaras, R. V Lord, S. J. Clark,
and P. L. Molloy (2015). De novo identification of differentially methylated regions in the human
genome. Epigenetics & Chromatin 8 , 6.
[12] Shim, H. and M. Stephens (2015). Wavelet-based genetic association analysis of functional pheno-
types arising from high-throughput sequencing assays. Annals of Applied Statistics 9 (2), 665–686.
[13] Yu, X. and S. Sun (2016). HMM-DM: identifying differentially methylated regions using a hidden
Markov model. Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology 15 (1), 69–81.
[14] Shen, L., J. Zhu, S.-Y. Robert Li, and X. Fan (2017). Detect differentially methylated regions
using non-homogeneous hidden Markov model for methylation array data. Bioinformatics 33 (23),
3701–3708.
[15] Fern´ andez, L., M. P´ erez, R. Olanda, J. M. Ordu˜ na, and J. Marquez-Molins (2020). HPG-DHunter:
an ultrafast, friendly tool for DMR detection and visualization. BMC Bioinformatics 21 , 287.
[16] Denault, W. R. P. and A. Jugessur (2021). Detecting differentially methylated regions using a
fast wavelet-based approach to functional association analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 22 , 61.
[17] Lee, W. and J. S. Morris (2016). Identification of differentially methylated loci using wavelet-based
functional mixed models. Bioinformatics 32 (5), 664–672.
[18] Schor, I. E., J. F. Degner, D. Harnett, E. Cannav` o, F. P. Casale, H. Shim, D. A. Garfield,
E. Birney, M. Stephens, O. Stegle, and E. E. M. Furlong (2017). Promoter shape varies across
populations and affects promoter evolution and expression noise. Nature Genetics 49 (4), 550–558.
[19] Fusi, N. and J. Listgarten (2017). Flexible modeling of genetic effects on function-valued traits.
Journal of Computational Biology 24 (6), 524–535.
[20] Collado-Torres, L., A. Nellore, A. C. Frazee, C. Wilks, M. I. Love, B. Langmead, R. A. Irizarry,
J. T. Leek, and A. E. Jaffe (2016). Flexible expressed region analysis for RNA-seq with derfinder.
Nucleic Acids Research 45 (2), e9.
[21] Collado-Torres, L., A. Nellore, K. Kammers, S. E. Ellis, M. A. Taub, K. D. Hansen, A. E. Jaffe,
B. Langmead, and J. T. Leek (2017). Reproducible RNA-seq analysis using recount2. Nature
Biotechnology 35 (4), 319–321.
[22] Zou, Y., P. Carbonetto, G. Wang, and M. Stephens (2022). Fine-mapping from summary data
with the “Sum of Single Effects” model. PLoS Genetics 18 (7), e1010299.
[23] Bennett, D. A., A. S. Buchman, P. A. Boyle, L. L. Barnes, R. S. Wilson, and J. A. Schnei-
der (2018). Religious orders study and rush memory and aging project. Journal of Alzheimer’s
disease 64 (s1), S161–S189.
[24] Denault, W. R. P., H. Sun, P. Carbonetto, A. Liu, P. L. D. Jager, D. Bennett, T. A. D. F. G.
Consortium, G. Wang, and M. Stephens (2025, August). fSuSiE enables fine-mapping of QTLs from
genome-scale molecular profiles. ISSN: 2692-8205 Pages: 2025.08.17.670732 Section: New Results.
[25] Yuan, K., R. J. Longchamps, A. F. Pardi˜ nas, M. Yu, T.-T. Chen, S.-C. Lin, Y. Chen, M. Lam,
R. Liu, Y. Xia, Z. Guo, W. Shi, C. Shen, T. S. W. o. P. G. Consortium, M. J. Daly, B. Neale,
Y.-C. A. Feng, Y.-F. Lin, C.-Y. Chen, M. O’Donovan, T. Ge, and H. Huang (2023, January). Fine-
mapping across diverse ancestries drives the discovery of putative causal variants underlying human
complex traits and diseases. ISSN: 2328-4293 Pages: 2023.01.07.23284293.
[26] Mallat, S. (1989). A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: the wavelet representation.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 11 (7), 674–693.
[27] Mallat, S. G. (2009). A wavelet tour of signal processing: the sparse way (3rd ed.). Boston, MA:
Elsevier/Academic Press.
[28] Dimitromanolakis, A., J. Xu, A. Krol, and L. Briollais (2019). sim1000G: a user-friendly genetic
variant simulator in R for unrelated individuals and family-based designs. BMC Bioinformatics 20 ,
26.

===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
20 Liu A. et al.
[29] Xiong, X., B. T. James, C. A. Boix, Y. P. Park, K. Galani, M. B. Victor, N. Sun, L. Hou, L.-L.
Ho, J. Mantero, A. N. Scannail, V. Dileep, W. Dong, H. Mathys, D. A. Bennett, L.-H. Tsai, and
M. Kellis (2023). Epigenomic dissection of Alzheimer’s disease pinpoints causal variants and reveals
epigenome erosion. Cell 186 (20), 4422–4437.e21.
[30] Leung, Y. Y., W.-P. Lee, A. B. Kuzma, H. Nicaretta, O. Valladares, P. Gangadharan, L. Qu,
Y. Zhao, Y. Ren, P.-L. Cheng, et al. (2025). Alzheimer’s disease sequencing project release 4 whole
genome sequencing dataset. Alzheimer’s & Dementia 21 (5), e70237.
[31] Wallace, C. (2021). A more accurate method for colocalisation analysis allowing for multiple
causal variants. PLoS genetics 17 (9), e1009440.
[32] Zou, Y., P. Carbonetto, D. Xie, G. Wang, and M. Stephens (2024). Fast and flexible joint
fine-mapping of multiple traits via the sum of single effects model. bioRxiv, 2023–04.
[33] Bellenguez, C., F. K¨ u¸ c¨ ukali, I. E. Jansen, L. Kleineidam, S. Moreno-Grau, N. Amin, A. C. Naj,
R. Campos-Martin, B. Grenier-Boley, V. Andrade, et al. (2022). New insights into the genetic
etiology of alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. Nature genetics 54 (4), 412–436.
[34] The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium (2015). A global reference for human genetic variation.
Nature 526 (7571), 68–74.
[35] Maller, J. B., G. McVean, J. Byrnes, D. Vukcevic, K. Palin, Z. Su, et al. (2012). Bayesian
refinement of association signals for 14 loci in 3 common diseases. Nature Genetics 44 (12), 1294–
1301.
[36] Sniekers, S. and A. van der Vaart (2020). Adaptive Bayesian credible bands in regression with a
Gaussian process prior. Sankhya A 82 (2), 386–425.
[37] Barber, S., G. P. Nason, and B. W. Silverman (2002). Posterior probability intervals for wavelet
thresholding. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 64 (2), 189–205.
[38] Wakefield, J. (2009). Bayes factors for genome-wide association stud-
ies: comparison with P-values. Genetic Epidemiology 33 (1), 79–86. eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/gepi.20359.
[39] Kim, Y., P. Carbonetto, M. Stephens, and M. Anitescu (2020). A fast algorithm for maximum
likelihood estimation of mixture proportions using sequential quadratic programming. Journal of
Computational and Graphical Statistics 29 (2), 261–273.

===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 21
METHODS
Simulation details
Simulated genotype The fine-mapping regions for the simulations were selected uniformly at random
from 94 breast cancer loci on autosomal chromosomes reported in [40] (see Supplementary Table 1 of
that paper). The median size of a fine-mapping reagion was about 1 Mb. Similar to [41], we used
sim1000G [28] to simulate genotypes of unrelated individuals based on the genotypes from the 1000
Genomes Phase 3 whole-genome sequencing [34]. First, we randomly selected a continent-of-origin
label (EUR, AMR, AFR, EAS, SAS), then we simulated SNP genotypes using N = 100 individuals
chosen uniformly at random from the 1000 Genomes samples with the selected continent-of-origin label.
Within the fine-mapping region, we kept all biallelic SNPs with minor allele frequencies (MAFs) of 5%
or greater; that is, SNPs in which the minor allele was observed at least 10 times out of the 2 N = 200
chromosomes). For a single simulation, the genotype matrix, X, was a matrix with N = 100 rows
(individuals) and J columns (SNPs), in which J ranged from approximation 1,500 to 4,000.
Simulated effects on molecular phenotypes. In these simulations, each modality of the molecular
traits data were simulated from an fSuSiE model (more precisely, a multiple wavelet regression model
with an SPS prior for the causal SNP effects). This involved the following steps: the effects of all causal
SNPs j (on the wavelet scale) were simulated from an SPS prior, fjt ∼PK
k=0 πksN(0, σ2
ks), in which
the first mixture component was always a “spike” at zero ( σ0s = 0); the effects of all non-causal SNPs
j were set to zero, fjt = 0; the effects in the measurement space were then obtained as B = FW−1;
and then the molecular trait data, Y, were simulated from the multiple regression model (1), with
em
it ∼ N(0, σ2). The residual variance σ2 was chosen so that X explained a specified total variance in
Y.
Similar to [26] [42, 43], we simulated molecular trait data with different levels of smoothness: first,
we drew a “smoothness parameter”, µ, uniformly at random between 0 and 1; then we set the k = 0
(“spike”) mixture component at each scale s to be π0s = 1 − 2−µs. The intuition is that settings of µ
closer to 1 produce “smoother” signals (larger effects at the largest scales), while settings of µ closer
to 0 produce effects of similar size across all scales. For each simulations we select at random the
number of causal variant from 1 to 20.
Univariate phenotypes were simulated under standard linear model where the effect yum ∼ Xβ +
eum where um stands for univariate trait number m and the entries of eum are independent N(0, σ2),
causal SNP effect were sampled using a βj|SNP j causal ∼ N(0, 1).
mfSuSiE model details
The mfSuSiE fitting procedure builds directly on the fSuSiE framework. At a high level, mfSuSiE fits
a functional regression model—using the fSuSiE method [24]—to each data modality separately, and
then combines the resulting evidence across modalities to form a joint Bayes factor for each SNP.
Below, we briefly summarize the single-modality functional regression procedure and then describe
how evidence is integrated across modalities to fit a sum of single-effect priors.
Multiple-trait wavelet regression We begin by describing the core computation inmfSuSiE: the multiple-
trait wavelet regression. To build intuition, we first consider the simpler case of a single trait.
Single-modality functional regression. Suppose we have N samples of a molecular trait measured
at T spatial (or genomic) locations. Let Ym ∈ RN ×T denote the corresponding matrix of observations
in modality m, with entries yit for sample i ∈ { 1, . . . , N} and location t ∈ { 1, . . . , T}. Let x =
(x1, . . . , xN)⊺ be a covariate of interest (e.g., a genotype).
We begin with the standard linear regression model
Y = x Fm + E, (5)

===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
22 Liu A. et al.
where Fm = ( Fm1, . . . ,FmT )⊺ is vector regression coefficients (“effects”), and E is the matrix of
residuals in the measurement space.
Wavelet transformation. To exploit the decorrelating properties of wavelets, we transform the
measurements to wavelet space via
Dm = YmW,
where W is the T ×T orthogonal wavelet projection matrix. The transformed data matrix Dm ∈ RN ×T
contains the wavelet coefficients (WCs). The orthogonality of W ensures invertibility and facilitates
recovery of measurement-scale quantities from wavelet-scale estimates; see [24] for further background.
Applying the transformation to model (5) yields the wavelet regression model
Dm = x f + Ew, (6)
where fm = FmW is the effect vector in wavelet space, and Ew contains the residuals in the wavelet
space. We assume the residuals are independent across locations ew
it ∼ N(0, σ2
t ) an assumption sup-
ported by the approximate “whitening” property of the wavelet transform [26, 27]. By contrast, the
residuals in measurement space exhibit strong spatial correlation and cannot be assumed independent.
Extending to multiple modalities mfSuSiE assumes that (i) residual noise is independent across modal-
ities, and (ii)effects across modalities are independent conditional on the causal SNP. Under these as-
sumptions, fitting a multiple-modality wavelet regression amounts to: a) applying the single-modality
wavelet regression independently to each of the m modalities, yielding a Bayes factor for the covari-
ate x in each modality; and b) combining evidence by taking the product of the m modality-specific
Bayes factors, which yields the joint Bayes factor for x. This joint Bayes factor is then used within
the mfSuSiE framework to fit the sum of single-effect priors across modalities.
Single function for multiple-trait regression model. The “single function for multiple-trait regression”
(SFMR) model is the functional counterpart of the “single function regression” (SFR) model [24].
The SFMR model is a multivariate multiple-trait wavelet regression model (6) with the constraint
that exactly one of the covariates j ∈ {1, . . . , J} has a nonzero effect on the wavelet coefficients:
Fm =diag(γ)F1
m (7)
γ ∼Multinom(1, p) (8)
F1
m ∼g1m (9)
where γ = ( γ1, . . . , γJ)⊺, F(1)
m is a J × T matrix with entries f 1
jt, Multinom( n, p) denotes the
multinomial distribution with sample sizen and multinomial probabilities p = (p1, . . . , pJ), g1m denotes
the prior distribution for the effect in modality m (greater details are provided in the supplementary
material), and diag( γ) denotes the P × P diagonal matrix in which the diagonal elements are given
by the vector γ = (γ1, . . . , γP ).
Defined in this way, the SFMR model has the following properties: (i) γ is a binary vector in which
exactly one of the elements is one and the rest are zeros; (ii) at most one of the rows of theFm contains
nonzero values; and (iii) for each Fm if there is a nonzero row in at least two matrix of coefficient (say
Fm1 and Fm2) they have the same nonzero row, this corresponds to the fact that the SFMR models
the effect of a single the causal variant at across all the modality.
mfSuSiE model. The mfSuSiE model extends the SFMR model to allow at most R ≥ 1 nonzero effects.
It is the multivariate functional counterpart to the functional Sum of Single Effects ( fSuSiE) model

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 23
[3], thus called the “mutlivariate functional Sum of Single Effects model” ( mfSuSiE) model. It is a
multiple-trait wavelet regression together with the following prior on F:
Fm =
RX
r=1
F(r)
m
F(r)
m = diag(γ(r)) × F r
m
γ(r) ∼ Multinom(1, p)
F r
m ∼ gmr.
(10)
Since each binary vector γ(r) = (γ(r)
1 , . . . , γ(r)
J ) contains exactly one 1, by construction at most R
rows of Fm contain nonzeros. The mfSuSiE model reduces to the SFMR model when R = 1. Note
that this model allows for a different prior on the effects gmr for each effect r and modality m ; these
priors are automatically adapted to the data using the algorithms described below.
Posterior statistics. Here we define the key posterior quantities used in an mfSuSiE analysis (Fig. 9).
We do not explain here how these quantities are computed; these details are given in the Supplementary
Note.
As we briefly explained in the Methods overview, we have three main inference aims:
• Variable selection: identify the causal SNPs.
• Modality annotation: identify which modalities are affected by one or more SNPs.
• Feature annotation: identify the molecular features and locations that are affected by one or
more SNPs in a given modality.
For variable selection, we compute credible sets (CSs): a CS is defined as a subset of {1, . . . , J}
containing an effect SNP with high probability [3, 35]. More precisely, a level- ρ CS is defined as a
set of SNPs that is as small as possible such that it has probability at least ρ of containing an effect
SNP (a row of F containing at least one non-zero). The number of CSs should reflect the number of
causal SNPs, and the size of a CS should reflect the number of plausible candidate effects SNPs. We
calculate CSs as described in [3].
To determine which SNPs within a CS are the strongest candidates for being an effect SNP, we
compute a posterior inclusion probability (PIP) for each SNP. The PIP for SNP j is defined as the
posterior probability that at least one of the entries in the jth row of f1, . . . ,fM (noted f1j) is nonzero:
PIP(j) = Pr(f1j ≡ 0, . . . ,fM j ≡ 0 | X, D1, . . . ,DM)
= 1 −
RY
r=1
 
1 − PIPr
j

, (11)
in which PIP r
j denotes the posterior probability that the rth single effect is nonzero for SNP j,
PIPr
j := Pr(γ(r)
j = 1 | X, D1, . . . ,DM). (12)
See Fig 9 for an illustration of PIPs and CSs.
The estimates of the SNPs on the molecular features in wavelet space are given by the posterior
mean of fm, ¯fm := E[fm | X, D]. The SNP effects in measurement space are given by the posterior mean
of B, ¯Fm := E[F | X, Y ]. By elementary properties of expectations, this is simply ¯Fm = ¯fm × W−1,
where W−1 denotes the inverse wavelet transform.
To identify affected features and locations, we compute 1 − α pointwise Bayesian credible intervals
[36, 37] for elements fjt and bjt at selected SNPs j. We define “affected” as those elements in which
the interval does not include zero. We refer to these intervals as “credible bands.” See Fig. 11 giving
an example of the posterior means and the credible bands of bjt for all epigenomic marks t = 1, . . . , T
and for all sentinel SNPs j. The affected locations t are defined as the locations in which at least one
of the credible bands for the sentinel SNPs at t does not contain a zero.

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
24 Liu A. et al.
Outline of an mfSuSiE analysis. Briefly, the minimal requirements for performing an mfSuSiE analysis
are:
i) An series m of N ×Tm matrices, each containing N molecular trait measurements at Tm locations,
some rows can contain missing data.
ii) An N × J matrix, ˜X, containing the genotype information for the J SNPs to be fine-mapped
after removing the linear effects of the selected covariates.
iii) Rmax, an upper limit on R, the number of single functions in thefSuSiE model. Unless specifically
mentioned, we set Rmax = 10.
An additional input is optional but recommended:
v) The positions (e.g., base-pair positions) for each modality ϕ1m, . . . , ϕTm ∈ R corresponding to
the locations 1, . . . , T. If not specified, the positions are assumed to be evenly spaced. Molecular
traits are typically not measured at evenly spaced positions, so providing this information will
produce more accurate results.
Beyond this, the mfSuSiE software includes many other settings and tuning parameters which may
be adjusted as needed.
The basic steps of an mfSuSiE analysis are as follows:
1. Compute the wavelet coefficients. Compute the WCs for each modality, Dm, from the molecular
trait data, Ym. For computational efficiency, Dm is obtained using the standard discrete wavelet
transform (DWT). (In later steps, a second set of WCs are computed using the translation-
invariant wavelet transform to improve accuracy.) For all the results presented in this paper,
we used the (undecimated) wavelet transform with Daubechies least-asymmetric orthonormal
compactly supported wavelets and with 10 vanishing moments (see Chapter 2 of [44]).
Note that the fSuSiE software currently supports any wavelet transform that is implemented in
the wavethresh R package [44].
2. Search for a good upper limit on R (optional). R determines the number of single functions and,
correspondingly, the number of causal SNPs. If R is too small, mfSuSiE may miss some causal
SNPs; on the other hand, if R is too large, mfSuSiE may take a long time to run. To reduce
the overall compuational speedd we implemented the same ad hoc procedure to find a reasonable
initial estimate of R as in fSuSiE. By default, this procedure starts by fitting an mfSuSiE model
with R = 3. If all R = 3 single functions are kept, R is increased by one. This procedure iterates
until one or more single functions are pruned, or if the upper limit, Rmax, is reached.
3. Fit mfSuSiE model. We use an iterative algorithm, described below, to fit the mfSuSiE model
to the data X, D. This includes estimating the priors gr
t and the residual variance σ2. During
estimation of the priors, some single functions may be pruned, and therefore R is an upper bound
on the final number of single functions (and CSs).
4. Compute SNP-level posterior quantities: CSs and PIPs. Compute CSs and PIPs from the fSuSiE
model fitted in the previous step.
5. Filter credible sets (optional). One may filter out the CSs with low “purity” (purity is defined as
the smallest absolute correlation among all pairs of SNPs in the CS). This often improves quality
or interpretability of the fine-mapping results.
6. Compute posterior effect estimates and credible bands. The final step is to compute posterior
mean estimates of bjt, and corresponding 1 − α pointwise credible bands, α ∈ [0, 1], for each
location t and sentinel SNP j (the SNP with the largest PIP in each CS). To address possible
inaccuracies with the DWT (see Chapter 9 of [27]), we compute a new WC matrix ˜D using the
translation-invariant wavelet transform (TIWT), also known as the stationary wavelet transform.
(In brief, the TIWT modifies the original DWT by applying it to shifted copies of the signal, then
the WCs are averaged across the shifted copies.) Since the TIWT greatly increases computational
effort, we use this TIWT only in this final step.

===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 25
Table 1. Chromatin accessibility QTL association testing summary by cell type
Cell Type Sample Size Peaks gPeaks † Shared gPeaks‡
Astrocytes (Ast) 71 111,325 422 2
Microglia (Mic) 70 74,210 285 0
Excitatory neurons (Exc) 61 201,651 766 5
Inhibitory neurons (Inh) 75 127,504 528 7
Oligodendrocytes (Oli) 83 176,039 1,198 10
Oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC) 73 66,154 227 1
†gPeaks correspond to peaks with at least one SNP reaching pβ < 0.005. ‡Shared gPeaks are peaks with
at least one SNP reaching pβ < 0.005 in at least two cell types.
Molecular QTL data resource and processing
We analyzed n = 92 ROSMAP snATAC-seq fragment files obtained from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC). Raw BCLs were demultiplexed using cellranger-atac mkfastq , aligned to GRCh38 with
cellranger-atac count , and processed using ArchR with stringent QC. High-quality nuclei were
defined as having TSS enrichment > 6 and 1,000–100,000 unique fragments, with doublets removed
at sample and cluster levels. Cell types were assigned by marker-gene accessibility, producing six
major lineages: Astrocytes (Ast), Excitatory neurons (Exc), Inhibitory neurons (Inh), Microglia (Mic),
Oligodendrocytes (Oli), and OPCs [29].
Fragment files were aggregated to form cell-type–specific donor-level pseudobulk profiles using
a fixed 500-bp peak set (363,775 peaks). Peaks overlapping hg38 blacklist regions were removed,
leaving 363,746 peaks. Donors with > 50 nuclei per cell type were retained, yielding a total of 84
unique donors across all cell types. We filtered low-coverage peaks, normalized counts, and generated
technical covariate-adjusted residuals. Technical covariates included sequencing batch, post-mortem
interval (PMI), log(nuclei count), TSS enrichment, nucleosome signal, total fragments, percent reads
in peaks, median peak width, and log(unique peaks).
Identification of regions with potential shared effect: We mapped chromatin accessibility QTLs
(caQTLs) across six cell types using TensorQTL. For each pseudobulk peak, SNPs within a ±1 Mb
window centered on the peak midpoint were tested. Covariates included age at death, sex, genotype,
and phenotype principal components (PCs). Following [29], we retained only SNP–peak associations
with minor allele count (MAC) > 5 and permutation-based empirical p-value using the Beta approx-
imation pbeta < 0.005. These SNP–peak pairs were defined as “gPeaks.” To ensure multi-cell-type
relevance, we selected only gPeaks significant in ≥ 2 cell types, resulting in 12 multi-cell-type caQTL
regions. Each gPeak (500 bp) was expanded symmetrically to a 51.2 kb window, which forms the first
source of candidate regions for mfSuSiE. Results of these analysis is summarized in Table 1.
To complement caQTL-driven regions, we incorporated N = 156 Alzheimer’s disease GWAS loci.
For each locus, the top SNP was identified from AD summary statistics and expanded by ±25.6 kb
to create a 51.2 kb region. This produced 156 AD-associated candidate regions, which were combined
with the 12 caQTL regions to yield a total of 168 fine-mapping regions. Only SNPs with MAF > 0.05
in ROSMAP WGS were retained for downstream modeling.
For every selected 51.2 kb region, we calculated base-level coverage directly from donor fragment
files. Coverage was aggregated into 50-bp bins, generating T = 1024 genomic positions (51.2 kb / 50
bp), M = 6 cell types, and N = union of QC-passed donors across the 6 cell types (up to n = 84).
This resulted in an N × T matrix per cell type, and an N × T × 6 multivariate phenotype tensor
per region. These phenotypes match the structure illustrated in Fig. 1 (51.2 kb windows, binned
base-level coverage).
For each 51.2 kb region, we extracted all SNPs within a ±500 kb (total 1 Mb) window centered
on the region midpoint. This window typically contains ∼ 2, 000–4,000 SNPs per region. Identical
covariates to those used in TensorQTL were applied in mfSuSiE, including sequencing batch, PMI,
age at death, sex, genotype PCs, and technical QC metrics (TSS enrichment, nucleosome signal,
log(nuclei), etc.). The final mfSuSiE input therefore consists of phenotype data as 51.2-kb region
× 1024 bins × 6 cell types ×N donors, genotype matrix restricted to the 1 Mb window per region,

===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
26 Liu A. et al.
covariates identical to TensorQTL, and variants with MAF > 0.05.
Data availability
The datasets analyzed, including the ADSP R4 WGS genotype data, are available for application and
download from the NIAGADS Data Sharing Service, https://dss.niagads.org. The code imple-
menting the data processing and analysis pipelines for is available at https://statfungen.github.
io/xqtl-protocol. The complete set of QTL data and QTL-GWAS integration models will be made
publicly available at https://synapse.org prior to publication for registered Synapse users, as per
the Data Management and Sharing policy of the FunGen-xQTL project. Other data sets used include:
1000 Genomes Phase 3 whole-genome sequencing data,https://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/
ftp/release/20130502/; GENCODE Ensembl/Havana database, https://useast.ensembl.org/
info/genome/genebuild/annotation_merge.html;
Code availability
The mfsusieR R package is available on GitHub at https://github.com/stephenslab/mfsusieR
(3-clause BSD license). PLINK 1.9 ( https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/); TensorQTL 1.0.8
(https://github.com/broadinstitute/tensorqtl/); sim1000G 1.40 (https://github.com/adimitromanolakis/
sim1000G); SeqSIMLA ( https://seqsimla.sourceforge.net/); susieR 0.14.7 ( https://github.
com/stephenslab/susieR/); coloc 5.2.3 ( https://github.com/chr1swallace/coloc/); ashr 2.2-63
(https://github.com/stephens999/ashr/); mixsqp 0.3.18 (https://github.com/stephenslab/mixsqp/);
wavethresh 4.7.2 (https://cran.r-project.org/package=wavethresh); R 4.3.3 (https://www.r-project.
org).
Methods-only references
[40] Fachal, L., H. Aschard, J. Beesley, D. R. Barnes, J. Allen, S. Kar, et al. (2020). Fine-mapping of
150 breast cancer risk regions identifies 191 likely target genes. Nature Genetics 52 , 56–73.
[41] Yang, Z., C. Wang, L. Liu, A. Khan, A. Lee, B. Vardarajan, R. Mayeux, K. Kiryluk, and I. Ionita-
Laza (2023). CARMA is a new Bayesian model for fine-mapping in genome-wide association meta-
analyses. Nature Genetics 55 (6), 1057–1065.
[42] Ma, L. and J. Soriano (2018). Efficient functional ANOVA through wavelet-domain Markov
Groves. Journal of the American Statistical Association 113 (522), 802–818.
[43] Crouse, M., R. Nowak, and R. Baraniuk (1998). Wavelet-based statistical signal processing using
hidden Markov models. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 46 (4), 886–902.
[44] Nason, G. (2008). Wavelet Methods in Statistics with R . New York, NY: Springer.
Acknowledgments
We thank the staff at the Research Computing Center at the University of Chicago for providing
the high-performance computing resources used to implement the numerical experiments. We thank
Angela Helfrich and Mark Bronnimann from Amazon Web Services for providing cloud computing
support for real-world data analysis. We also thank the members of the Alzheimer’s Disease Sequencing
Project Functional Genomics Consortium (FunGen-AD) for providing the FunGen-xQTL resource.
This work was supported in part by NIH grants R01AG076901 and R01AG086467 (to G.W., A.L.),
U01AF072572 (to P.L.D.) and a grant from the Urbut Family Foundation (to G.W.). This project is
supported by the Eric and Wendy Schmidt AI in Science Postdoctoral Fellowship, a Schmidt Sciences,
LLC program. Additional support came from the University of Chicago Data Science Institute through
the 2024 AI+Science Research Initiative. This research was conducted using data from the Religious
Orders Study and the Rush Memory and Aging Project (ROSMAP). We thank the participants and
investigators of these studies.

===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 27
Author contributions
GW and WD jointly supervised research. WD developed the method and algorithm with input from
AL and GW. GW and WD conceived and designed the experiments and data analysis. WD imple-
mented the methods comparisons in simulations with input from AL. AL conducted data applications
and interpreted the results with input from WD and GW. PLD contributed and supervised molecular
QTL data production from the ROSMAP cohort. The Alzheimer’s Disease Functional Genomics Con-
sortium contributed additional data resources. WD, AL and GW wrote and revised the manuscript.
All authors critically reviewed the manuscript, suggested revisions as needed, and approved the final
version.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
28 Liu A. et al.
Supplementary figures
Single−molecular Two−molecular Multi−molecular
SD=1SD=2SD=3SD=4
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Mean PIP in Bin
Empirical Inclusion Probability
PIP calibration −− mfSuSiE
Supplementary Figure 5. PIP calibration assessment for mfSuSiE method. Posterior inclusion probability
calibration evaluation for themfSuSiE method across three modeling scenarios under noise levels ranging from
SD = 1 to 4: (1) Single molecular phenotype (32 columns); (2) mfSuSiE with 2 molecular phenotypes (32 + 64
columns); (3) Full model withmfSuSiE using 2 molecular phenotypes + 3 univariate phenotypes. The calibration
plots assess whether reported posterior inclusion probabilities match empirical frequencies, demonstrating the
reliability of uncertainty quantification across different noise conditions and model complexities.

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 29
Single−molecular Two−molecular Multi−molecular
SD=1SD=2SD=3SD=4
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Mean PIP in Bin
Empirical Inclusion Probability
PIP calibration −− fSuSiE
Supplementary Figure 6. PIP calibration assessment for fSuSiE method. Posterior inclusion probability
calibration evaluation for the single-cell-typefSuSiE method across three modeling scenarios under noise levels
ranging from SD = 1 to 4: (1) Single molecular phenotype (32 columns); (2) fSuSiE with single molecular
phenotype (32 columns) compared against mfSuSiE with 2 molecular phenotypes; (3) fSuSiE using only the
first molecular phenotype compared against full modelmfSuSiE. The calibration plots assess whether reported
posterior inclusion probabilities match empirical frequencies, enabling direct comparison of calibration quality
with the mfSuSiE method and demonstrating uncertainty quantification performance across different noise
conditions.

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
30 Liu A. et al.
Supplementary Figure 3. Complete simulation results for single molecular phenotype model. Compre-
hensive performance comparison between mfSuSiE and fSuSiE across four noise levels (SD = 1, 2, 3, 4) for
the single molecular phenotype scenario. Both methods analyze the same single molecular phenotypes with 32
columns. Performance metrics include power (proportion of true causal SNPs included in at least one credible
set), coverage (proportion of credible sets containing a true causal SNP), credible set size distribution, and pu-
rity (proportion of causal SNPs within each credible set). Each panel shows results across different simulation
parameters with n = 100 samples.

===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 31
Supplementary Figure 7. Complete simulation results for two molecular phenotypes model. Compre-
hensive performance comparison between mfSuSiE and fSuSiE across four noise levels (SD = 1, 2, 3, 4) for
the two molecular phenotypes scenario. mfSuSiE analyzes both molecular phenotypes (32 + 64 columns)
jointly, while fSuSiE analyzes only the first molecular phenotype (32 columns) independently. This comparison
demonstrates the advantage of joint modeling when multiple related molecular phenotypes are available. Per-
formance metrics include power, coverage, credible set size distribution, and purity. Each panel shows results
across different simulation parameters with n = 100 samples.

===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
32 Liu A. et al.
Supplementary Figure 7. Complete simulation results for multiple molecular phenotypes model. Com-
prehensive performance comparison betweenmfSuSiE and fSuSiE across four noise levels (SD = 1, 2, 3, 4) for
the multiple molecular phenotypes scenario. mfSuSiE analyzes both molecular phenotypes (32 + 64 columns)
and 3 univariate phenotypes jointly, while fSuSiE analyzes only the first molecular phenotype (32 columns)
independently. This comparison demonstrates the advantage of joint modeling when multiple related molecular
phenotypes are available. Performance metrics include power, coverage, credible set size distribution, and
purity. Each panel shows results across different simulation parameters with n = 100 samples.

===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 33
0
10
20
30
1 2 3 4 5
Runtime rate (mfSuSiE / fSuSiE sum6)
Count
rate < 1 means mfSuSiE is faster; rate > 1 means fSuSiE is faster
mfSuSiE / fSuSiE(sum6) runtime rate per region
Supplementary Figure 8. Runtime performance of mfSuSiE demonstrates fast execution and linear
scaling with number of cells. mfSuSiE runs efficiently and scales roughly linearly with the number of cells
analyzed. The analysis shows consistent performance across different dataset sizes, making it suitable for
large-scale single-cell applications. Results are shown for credible sets with purity ≥ 0.8 and PIP ≥ 0.1.
Mic Oli OPC
Ast Exc Inh
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5
0
5
10
15
20
0
5
10
15
20
Functional Effect Size
−log10(LFSR)
Volcano by Cell Type
Supplementary Figure 9. Cell-type-specific volcano plots of mfSuSiE fine-mapping results. Each panel
displays the effect size (x-axis) versus − log10(LFSR) (y-axis) for variants within credible sets (CSs) for a given
cell type. Local false sign rate (LFSR) represents the posterior probability of incorrect effect direction; lower
values indicate higher confidence. Variants are included if they belong to CSs with purity> 0.8 or have posterior
inclusion probability (PIP) > 0.1 outside 95% CSs. Dashed horizontal line indicates LFSR = 0.01 significance
threshold. The y-axis is truncated at 20 for visualization.

===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
34 Liu A. et al.
Alzheimer disease   CS1= 130
0
2
4
6−log10(P)
chr16:23580183:TAAAA>TAAA AD coloc locus
LD=0.4 with CS1
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00mfSuSiE PIP
CS L1 (n=3)
CS L2 (n=19)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3mvSuSiE PIP
AstExcInhMicOliOPC
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20 mfSuSiE effect
AC127459.2
USP31
AC127459.1
AC127459.3
AC099482.2
SCNN1G
AC099482.1
SCNN1B
COG7
RN7SKP23
SNORA75
AC008915.1
AC008915.2
GGA2
CCNYL7
SUB1P4
UBFD1
AC008870.2
NDUFAB1
PALB2
AC008870.4
DCTN5
AC008870.1
PLK1
AC008870.3
ERN2
AC008870.5
AC012317.1
AC012317.2
CHP2
AC130454.1
EARS2
23000000 23250000 23500000 23750000 24000000
chr16
Supplementary Figure 10. EARS2 case study.

===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 35
Supplementary text
Notation Matrices are denoted by bold, uppercase letters (e.g., A). Three-dimensional tensors are
denoted by bold, uppercase letters with three dots as indexes (e.g., A.,.,.). Furthermore, A.,i,j cor-
responds to the vector in the tensor A.,.,. when fixing the two other dimensions. Similarly , A.,.,j
corresponds to the matrix in the tensor A.,.,. when fixing one dimension. Column vectors are de-
noted by bold, lowercase letters ( a), and scalars are denoted by letters ( a or A). For indexing, we
use capital letters to denote the total number of elements and the corresponding lowercase symbol
to denote the index, e.g., i = 1, . . . , I. For wavelets, we use two sets of indexes; when necessary, we
use the classic double indexing of wavelet [27], where the index s ∈ 0, . . . , S corresponds to the scale
(or level of resolution) index and l ∈ 1, . . . ,2s + 1 to the location index. When possible, we simply
index wavelet coefficients by t ∈ 1, ..., T. We denote sets by calligraphic letters (e.g., A) and tensors
are denoted using the “frak” font (i.e. ABCDEF). To lighten the notation, collections of elements
described by a set of indexes are indicated between parenthesis without specifying the index support;
e.g. ( au,h) = (au,h)u∈U ,h∈H
1. Inference in the wavelet space details
When applying the wavelet transform by the right, and noting D = YW the empirical wavelet
coefficient, Fj = FjW the wavelet transform of the j function and U = U′W, where the entries of U
are iid N(0, σ2). The previous model can be written as
D1N ×T = XN ×J F1J×T + U1N ×T (13)
D2N ×T = XN ×J F2J×T + U2N ×T (14)
. . . (15)
DMN ×T = XN ×J FMJ×T + UMN ×T (16)
For the sake of simplicity, we assume that each Dm and X is scaled and center and so the intercept
for each modality to be null. We also use the classic double indexing of wavelet coefficient (s,l) where
s ∈ [1, log2(T )] and l ∈ [0, s − 1] instead of the t ∈ [1 : T ] notation.
Likelihood We assume that the components of transformed data D to be independent.
Then the likelihood of D can be factorised as
L(D, X, F, U) =
MY
m=1
NY
i=1
log2(T )Y
s
2s
Y
l
N(di,s,l,m, µi,s,l,m, σ2) (17)
Where di,s,l,m is the observed wavelet coefficient s, l for individual i in frame m and µi,s,l,m is mean
of wavelet coefficient s, l for individual i in frame m, .
Prior Let’s denote f (e)
s,l,m the p-vector corresponding to the eth effect of each SNP for wavelet coefficient
s, l in modality m (i.e., F(e)
.,s,l,m). We model the effect of the SNPs on the different modalities through
the following sum of single effect model
F =
EX
E=1
F(e) (18)
F(e)
.,s,l,m = γef (e)
s,l,m (19)
γe = M ult(1, π) (20)
f (e)
s,l,m ∼
KX
k=0
πs,kN(0, σ2
k,s) (21)

===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
36 Liu A. et al.
For the sake of lightening the notation we assume that σ in equation 17 and the grid of σ1:K is the
same for every scale and every function; in practice, we use a different grid and different noise level of
for each scale and function. We refer to the model described in equation 18 as the (sum) of multiple
functions model ( mfSuSiE for short)
2. Fitting the sum of multiple functions Bayesian regression
First we start by detailing how to fit the following basic model
µis,l,m = xiF(1)
.,s,l,m (22)
F(1)
.,s,l,m = γ1f (1)
s,l,m (23)
γ1 = M ult(1, π) (24)
f (1)
s,l,m ∼
KX
k=0
πs,kN(0, σ2
k,s) (25)
which we refer to as the single effect multivariate function Bayesian regression model. This fitting
procedure will be used afterward to fit model mfSuSiE 18.
2.1. Remainder of the univariate Bayesian regression
Let’s consider the following simple Bayesian functional regression
D = xf t + U (26)
(Ui,t) ∼ N(0, σ2) (27)
fs,l ∼ N(0, σ2
0) (28)
Where D is a matrix of wavelet coefficients of dimension N × T , x is a vector of length N, f is
a vector of length T , U is a matrix of dimension N × T , and i ∈ [1 : N] and t ∈ [1 : T ]. Then by
assuming independence of the wavelet coefficients, the component of f can be estimated via maximum
likelihood, as well as their corresponding variance σ2
f are:
ˆfs,l = (xtx)−1xtD.,s,l (29)
σ2
f = σ2
xtx (30)
Where D.,s,l is the column of D corresponding to the empirical wavelet coefficients s, l. Thus, the
posterior distribution of each component of f is
fs,l|D.,s,l, x, σ2, σ2
0 ∼ N(µ1,s,l, σ2
1) (31)
σ2
1,s,l = 1
1
σ2
f
+ 1
σ2
0
(32)
µ1,s,l =
σ2
1,s,l
σ2
f
ˆfs,l (33)
Following [38], Bayes factor for comparing the estimate f by the simple Bayesian functional re-
gression with the null ( H0 : f ≡ 0) is given by:

===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 37
BFsimple

D, X, σ2, σ2
0

= p(D|X, f , σ2, σ2
0)
p(D|X, f ≡ 0, σ2, σ2
0) (34)
=
Q
s,l
R
p
 
D.s,l|x, fs,l, σ2
p(fs,l|σ2
0)d fs,l
Q
s,l p(D.,s,l|x, fs,l = 0, σ2, σ2
0) (35)
=
Q
s,l N( ˆfs,l, 0, σ2
0 + σ2
f)
Q
s,l N( ˆfs,l, 0, σ2
f)
(36)
=
 
σf 2
σ2
f + σ2
0
! T
2
exp

 σ2
0
σ2
f + σ2
0

X
s,l
z2
s,l
2



 (37)
Where zs,l =
ˆfs,l
σf
.
2.2. Fitting single effect multivariate function Bayesian regression model with mixture prior using a
single covariate
Here we fit model 22 in the case where we assume that X as a single column (i.e., X = x and so
γ1 = 1). Suppose that πs,k,m, σ2
k,s are given. Let’s introduce some latent state each s, l, m
p(κs,l,m = k) = πs,k,m (38)
f (1)
s,l,m|κs,l,m = k ∼ N(0, σ2
s,k) (39)
Using results from equations 32 and 33, the posterior distribution of fs,l given that κs,l = k is
f (1)
s,l,m|D, σ2, σ2
0, κs,l = k ∼ N(µ1k,s,l,m, σ2
1k,s,l,m) (40)
where (41)
σ2
1k,s,l = 1
1
σ2
f ,s,l,m
+ 1
σ2
k
(42)
µ1k,s,l =
σ2
1k,s,l,m
σ2
f
ˆfs,l,m (43)
(44)
Thus the posterior mean of f is given by
E[f (1)
s,l,m] = p(fs,l,m|D, x, σ2, (σ2
k), (πk,s)) (45)
=
KX
k=0
µ1k,s,l,m˜πk,s,l,m (46)
Where ˜πk,s,l,m is the posterior probability of κs,l,m
˜πk,s,l,m = p(κs,l,m = k|D, x, σ2, (σ2
k), (πk,s,m)) (47)
= πk,s,mBFuni
 
D, X, σ2, σ2
k

PK
k′=0 πk′,sBFuni
 
D, X, σ2, σ2
k′
 (48)
Where BFuni is defined as
BFuni

D, X, m, σ2, σ2
k

=
N( ˆfs,l,m, 0, σ2
k + σ2
f)
N( ˆfs,l,m, 0, σ2
f)
(49)

===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
38 Liu A. et al.
Finally, the Bayes factor for the single multivariate function Bayesian regression using a mixture
prior can be computed as follows:
BFmix

D, x, σ2, (σ2
k)1:K, (πk,s))

= p(D|x, f , σ2, (σ2
k)1:K)
p(D|x, f ≡ 0, σ2, (σ2
k)1:K) (50)
=
Q
m
Q
s,l
PK
k=1 πk,s,mN( ˆfs,l,m, 0, σ2
k + σ2
f)
Q
m
Q
s,l N( ˆfs,l,m, 0, σ2
f)
(51)
3. Bayesian single multiple function
Let’s fit model model 22 in the case where X is multivariate. Following the seminal work of Wang and
colleagues [3] this model can be fitted using the expression described in 33,32, 47, 50 and the posterior
distribution of γ1
γ1|D, X, σ2
0, σ2 ∼ M ult(1, α) (52)
Where the component of the posterior probability of inclusion α can be computed as following
using Bayes rules
αj = pjBFmix(D, xj, (σ2
k)1:K, (πk,s)), σ2)PJ
j′=1 pj′BFmix(D, x′
j, (σ2
k)1:K, (πk,s)), σ2)
(53)
E[f (1)
j,s,l,m] = αj
X
k
µjk,s,l,m˜πk,s,l,m (54)
E[f (1)
j,s,l,m
2
] = αj(σ2
1,s,l +
X
k
µ2
jk,s,l,m˜πk,s,l,m) (55)
Estimating hyperparameters (πk,s,m) As noted earlier, the following M ×K×S+1 hyperparameters
σ, (πk,s,m) can be obtained using an empirical Bayes approach. We use a weighted EM algorithm to
maximize the marginal likelihood. We provide the detail of the algorithm below. First, notice that
the log-likelihood can be written as
L(D, X, σ2, (σ2
k)) = p(D|X, σ2, (σ2
k)) (56)
∝
JX
j=1
pjBFmix(D, Xj, σ,(σ2
k), (πk,s))) (57)
Let X be a random variable generated from the following mixture:
X ∼
JX
j=1
p′
jgj(., (σ2
k,s), σ2) (58)
Where p′
j is the proportion of the component j in the mixture. Let’s now introduce the latent
variable Z with value in J1 : JK, such that X|Z = j ∼ gj(., (σ2
k,s), σ2) and p(Z = j) = p′
j
Then the complete log-likelihood can be written
l(D, X, F , σ2, σ2
0) ∝
JX
j=1
I(Z = j)

log(p′
j) + log(gj(xj, σ2
0, σ2))

(59)
Knowing Z|X, we can maximize the expected log-likelihood

===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 39
EZ|X
h
l(D, X, F , σ2, σ2
0)
i
∝
JX
j=1
EZ|X

I(Z = j)

log(p′
j) + log(gj(x, σ2
0))

(60)
E step Thus E step can be computed as
EZ|X

I(Z = j)

t+1 = p′
jBFmix(D, Xj, σ,(σ2
k)1:K, (πk,s))
PJ
j′=1 p′
jBFmix(D, Xj′, σ,(σ2
k)1:K, (πk,s))
(61)
As previously we note ζj,t+1 = EZ|X

I(Z = j)

t+1
M step Thus the complete log-likelihood can be written as
JX
j=1
1(z = j)

log(pj) + log

BFmix(D, Xj, σ,(σ2
k)1:K, (πk,s))

(62)
(63)
Taking the expected value of the complete log-likelihood is therefore proportional (with respect to
(πk,s)) to
∝
JX
j
ζj,t+1 log

BFmix(D, Xj, σ,(σ2
k)1:K, (πk,s))

(64)
∝
JX
j
ζj,t+1
X
m
X
s,l
log


KX
k
πk,s,mN( ˆfj,s,l,m, 0, σ2
k + σ2
f)

 (65)
taking the log (66)
∝
MY
m=1
SY
s=1
JY
j


2s+1Y
l=1


KX
k
πk,s,mN( ˆfj,s,l,m, 0, σ2
k + σ2
f)




ζj,t+1
(67)
Where ˆfj,s,l,m is the maximum likelihood estimate of the j th on wavelet coefficient s, l in modality m.
Equation 67 can be maximised using a weighted EM algorithm to optimise over on set of ( πk,s,m)1:K
(here s is fixed) so corresponding S × M independent weighted maximization problems
JY
j=1


2s+1Y
l=1


KX
k
πk,s,mN( ˆfj,s,l,m, 0, σ2
k + σ2
f)




ζj,t+1
(68)
Given that the only unknown quantities are the mixture proportions, these problems are convex
optimization problems [39] that can be solved efficiently using interior point methods. In practice we
use the mixsqp R package to perform these optimization [39].
4. Variational algorithm
In this section, we describe our variational approach to fit the sum of single functions model (see
equation 18). Let’s rewrite 18 in the following form form:
D ∼ p(D|F, X, θ) (69)
F ∼ g(.) (70)

===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
40 Liu A. et al.
Where D is the matrix of the observed data, X is the matrix of the observed covariates, F is the
latent/unobserved variable of interest, g ∈ G is a prior distribution for F and θ ∈ Θ is the set of the
additional/nuisance parameters to be estimated.
We adopt an Empirical Bayes (EB) approach, as we are estimating our prior g and the noise
parameters θ by maximizing the marginal log-likelihood:
(ˆg, ˆθ) = argmax
g∈G,θ∈Θ
l(g, θ, D, X) (71)
where (72)
l(g, θ, D, X) = log
Z
p(D|F, θ, X)g(F)dF (73)
Once these quantities are estimated, we compute the posterior distribution for F :
ˆppost(F) = ppost(F|D, X, ˆg, ˆθ) ∝ p(D|F, X, ˆθ)ˆg(F) (74)
4.1. KL divergence and ELBO
As computing the full posterior of model 18 in an intractable problem, we use a VA. More precisely,
we seek at finding a distribution q that belongs to a certain class of function Q (detailed in equation
78) that minimizes the KL divergence with the true posterior of model 18. For the sake of pedagogy,
let’s rewrite the KL divergence in terms of evidence and evidence lower bound
KL(q(F) || p(F|D, X, θ)) = EF∼q
"
log
 q(F)
p(F|D, X, θ)
#
= EF∼q
h
log
 
q(F)
i
− EF∼q
h
log
 
p(F|D, X, θ)
i
= EF∼q
h
log
 
q(F)
i
− EF∼q
"
log
 p(D, X, F, θ)
p(D|X, θ)p(θ)
#
= EF∼q
h
log
 
q(F)
i
− EF∼q

log p(D, X, F, θ)

+ EF∼q

log p(D|X, θ)

= log p(D|X, θ) − EF∼q
"
log
 p(D, X, F, θ)
q(F)
#
= log
Z
p(D|X, F, θ)g(F)dF − EF∼q
"
log
 p(D, X, F, θ)
q(F)
#
= evidence − ELBO
In particular, the ELBO can be written as:
ELBO = F (g, q, θ, D, X) = log
Z
p(D|F, X, θ)g(F)dF − KL(q(F) || p(F|D, X, θ)) (75)
= EF∼q

log p(D|F, X, θ)

+ EF∼q

log g(F)
q(F)

(76)
So the ELBO depends on three ”parameters” g(.), q(.), θ. Our general optimization problem is the
following:
(ˆg, ˆq, ˆθ) = argmax
g,q∈Q,θ
F (g, q, θ, D, X) (77)
Maximizing the ELBO with respect to g(.), θ corresponds to our EB procedure (as the first terms
of eq 76 corresponds to the marginal likelihood); maximizing the ELBO with respect to q ∈ Q is the

===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 41
”standard” variational Bayes (VB) approach. We optimize 75 in a iterative fashion, by keeping q(.)
constant and maximize over g(.), θ. Then by keeping g(.), θ constant and maximize over q(.). The EB
procedure to maximize g is described in equation 67 . Here we solely focus on maximizing the ELBO
while keeping g and θ constant.
4.2. Variational approximation
As previously mentioned, computing the full posterior of 75 is a (likely) intractable problem. Thus,
we restrict the form of the “candidate” posterior ( q) to facilitate the optimization. More precisely, we
choose the classical mean-field approximation, so Q is defined as
q(F(1), .., F(E))
EY
E=1
qe(F(e)) (78)
Form of the ELBO For q ∈ Q the ELBO can be written as:
F (q, g, σ2; D, X) = − T × N × M × M
2 log(2πσ2) − 1
2σ2 EF∼q

X
m
X
s
X
l
||ds,l,m −
EX
e=1
Xf (e)
s,l,m||2


(79)
+
EX
e=1
EF∼qe
"
log ge(F(e))
qe(F(e))
#
(80)
Where ||.|| is the euclidean norm and g = (g1, ..., gE) is a collection of mixture prior.
EF∼qe[f (e)
s,l,m] = ¯fe,s,l,m (81)
EF∼qe[f (e)
s,l,m
2
] = ¯f (2)
e,s,l,m (82)
which we provide analytical form in 54 and 55 given that ge is a scale mixture prior. Thus the
“expected residual sum of squares” (ERSS) for modality m can be written as:
ERSS (D, X, ¯f , ¯f 2) =
X
s
X
l
||ds,l,m −
EX
e=1
XX ¯fe,s,l,m||2 +
EX
e=1
X
s
X
l
V ar[fe,s,l,m] (83)
4.3. Updating qe and ge in sum of single functions model
In the line of [3] (proposition A.1) we show that maximising F (q, g, σ2; D, X) over (qe, ge) corresponds
to maximising the ELBO for a simple model where the observed responses are replaced by the partial
expected residuals. More precisely:
argmax
qe,ge
F (q, g, σ2; D, X) = argmax
qe,ge
Fe(qe, ge, σ2; ˆR(e), X) (84)
where
Fe(qe, ge, σ2; ˆR(e), X) = − T × N × M
2 log(2πσ2) − 1
2σ2 EF∼qe

X
m
X
s
X
l
 ˆR(e)
s,l,m − Xf (e)
s,l,m
2


(85)
+ EF∼qe
"
log ge(F(e))
qe(F(e))
#
.

===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
42 Liu A. et al.
and ˆR(e)
s,l,m corresponds to the expected residual of the s, l wavelet coefficient in frame m without
effect e, i.e.:
ˆR(e)
s,l,m = Eq
h
R(e)
s,l,m
i
= Eq

X
s
X
l
ds,l,m −
X
e′̸=e
Xf (e′)
s,l,m

 (86)
We sometime abuse the notation by noting ˆR(e) the set of partial residuals wavelet coefficients
across all wavelet indexes ( s, l) and all modalities ( m).
Proof : We rewrite the ELBO only in function ofqe, ge, the other terms are captured byC, a numerical
constant
F (q, g, σ2; D, X) = − 1
2σ2 EF∼q

X
m
X
s
X
l
||ds,l,m −
EX
e=1
Xf (e)
s,l,m||2

 + EF∼qe
"
log ge(F(e))
qe(F(e))
#
+ C
(87)
= − 1
2σ2 EF∼q

X
m
X
s
X
l
||R(e)
s,l,m − Xf (e)
s,l,m||2

 + EF∼qe
"
log ge(F(e))
qe(F(e))
#
+ C (88)
= − 1
2σ2 EF∼q

X
m
X
s
X
l
(R(e)
s,l,m − Xf (e)
s,l,m)t(R(e)
s,l,m − Xf (e)
s,l,m)

 + (89)
EF∼qe
"
log ge(F(e))
qe(F(e))
#
+ C
= − 1
2σ2 EF∼qe

X
m
X
s
X
l
−2 ˆR(e)
s,l,m
tXf (e)
s,l,m + (Xf (e)
s,l,m)t(Xf (e)
s,l,m)

 + (90)
EF∼qe
"
log ge(F(e))
qe(F(e))
#
+ C
=Fe(qe, ge, σ2; ˆR(e), X) + C (91)
4.4. Computing the ELBO
Using equations 54 and 55, the first two components of the ELBO , Fe(qe, ge, σ2; ˆR(e), X) are straight-
forward to compute (see equation ). The third term can be computed using the marginal log-likelihood
of the single function model for effect e; given that ˆqe = argmaxqe Fe(qe, ge, σ2; ˆR(e), X), from equation

===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
Fine-mapping molecular QTLs using mfSuSiE 43
91it follows that:
EF∼ˆqe
"
log ge(F(e))
ˆqe(F(e))
#
= Fe(ˆqe, ge, σ2; ˆR(e), X) + T × N × M
2 log(2πσ2) (92)
+ 1
2σ2 EF∼ˆqe

X
m
X
s
X
l
|| ˆR(e)
s,l,m − Xf (e)
s,l,m||2

 (93)
Thus
EF∼ˆqe
"
log ge(F(e))
ˆqe(F(e))
#
= log(p( ˆR(e)|X, σ2)) + T × N × M
2 log(2πσ2) (94)
+ 1
2σ2 EF∼ˆqe

X
m
X
s
X
l
|| ˆR(e)
s,l,m − Xf (e)
s,l,m||2

 (95)
EF∼ˆqe
"
log ge(F(e))
ˆqe(F(e))
#
= le(σ2; ˆR(e), X) + T × N × M
2 log(2πσ2) (96)
+ 1
2σ2 EF∼ˆqe

X
m
X
s
X
l
|| ˆR(e)
s,l,m − Xf (e)
s,l,m||2

 (97)
As (98)
Fe(ˆqe, ge, σ2; ˆR(e), X) = EF∼ˆqe
"
log p(F, ˆR(e)|ge, σ2, X)
ˆqe(F)
#
(99)
set ˆqe = p(F|ge, σ2; ˆR(e)); that we can compute (100)
Fe(ˆqe, ge, σ2; ˆR(e), X) = EF∼p(F|ge,σ2; ˆR(e))
"
log p(F, ˆR(e)|ge, σ2, X)
p(F|ge, σ2; ˆR(e))
#
= le(σ2; ˆR(e), X) (101)
Where le(σ2; ˆR(e), X) is the log marginal likelihood of the single function model for effect e. Further-
more, by definition p(F|ge, σ2; ˆR(e)) is the overall maximizer over qe of Fe(qe, ge, σ2; ˆR(e), X). Thus
completing the proof.
